DUNGEONS DRAGONS 


Everything a Dungeon Master needs to weave legendary stories 


for the world s 


















Credits 


D&D Lead Designers: Mike Mearls, Jeremy Crawford 

Dungeon Master’s Guide Leads: Jeremy Crawford, 

Christopher Perkins, James Wyatt 

Designers: Robert), Schwalb, Rodney Thompson, Peter Lee 

Editors: Scott Fitzgerald Gray, Michele Carter, Chris Sims, 
Jennifer Clarke Wilkes 

Producer: Greg Biisland 

Art Directors: Kate Irwin, Dan Gelon, Jon Schindehette, 

Mari Kolkowsky, Melissa Rapier, Shauna Narciso 

Graphic Designers: Emi Tanjt, Bree Heiss, Trish Yochum, 

Barry Craig 

Cover Illustrator: Tyler Jacobson 

interior Illustrators: Rob Alexander, DaveAllsop, Daren Bader, 
Mark Behm, Eric Belisle, Steven Belledin, Kerem Beyit, 

Noah Bradley, Aleksi Briclot, Filip Burburan, Mifivoj Ceran, 
Sidharth Chaturvedi, Conceptopolis, jD, Jesper Ejsfng, 

Wayne England, Emily Fiegenschuh, Scott M, Fischer, 

Justin Gerard, E.W.Hekaton, Jon Hodgson, Ralph Horsley, 
Tyler Jacobson, Jason Juta, Sam Keiser, Chad King, Vance 
Kovacs, Oily Lawson, Chuck Lukacs, Howard Lyon, Victoria 
Maderna, Aaron Miller, Mark Molnar, Terese Nielsen, 

William O'Connor, Hector Ortiz, Adam Paquette, Claudio 
Rozas, Steve Prescott, David Rapoza, Rob Rey, Aaron J, Riley. 
Amir Salehi, Mike Schley, Chris Seaman, Sean Sevestre, Ilya 
Shkipin, Carmen Stnek, Craig J Spearing, John Stanko, Alex 
Stone, Matias Tapia, Joel Thomas, Cory Trego-Erdner, Beth 
Trott, Cyril Van Der Haegen, Raoul Vitale, Tyler Walpole, 
Julian Kok Joon Wen, Richard Whitters, Eva Widermann, 
Mark Winters, Ben Wootten, Kieran Yanner, James Zhang 

Additional Contributors: Wolfgang Baur, C.M. Cline, Bruce R. 
Cordell, Jesse Decker, Bryan Fagan, James Jacobs, Robin D. 
Laws, Colin McComb, David Noonan, Rich Redman, Matt 
Sernett, Lester Smith, SteveTownshend, Chris Tulach, Steve 
Winter, Chris Youngs 


Project Management: Ne; Sr - : -- < - I,'. 

Production Services: Cynca Cs e ■ ■ s E ' i - I - - -: 

Jefferson Dunlap. David Gersr —a-. A- u Wi 

Brand and Marketing: \ = : i - _ z :: 

Chris Lindsa;. She ■ Mazza^zz = - 5 : 

Laura Tommervik, Kirr Lur zs. : ^ ’ e : • : : 

Based on the original D&D game created by 

E. Cary Gygax and Dave Arneson 
with Brian Slume, Rob Kurtz amts - -c and Dz^ - 
Drawing from further development by 
J. Eric Holmes. Tom Mold .ay r rar- Ve r, :ze -a'tm A s::n 
Harold Johnson, David “Zeb f Cook Ed C^eer : 

Keith Baker, Tracy Hickman, Margaret A-eis. Douglas M z: 
Jeff Grubb, Jonathan Tweet, Monte Cook, Sk p X 
Richard Baker. Peter Adkison, Bill Slsvicsek Andy Cc 
and Rob Heinsoo 

Playtesting provided by 

over 175,000 fans of D&D. Thank you! 

Additional feedback provied by 
Teos Abadia, Robert Alaniz, Jason Baxter, Bill Benham 
Darron Bowley, David Callander, Mik Calow. Christopher 
D'Andrea. Brian Danford, Krupal Desaf, Josh Dillard. Sa~ 

E. Simpson Jr., Tim Eagon, David Ewalt. Rob Ford. Roze ■: 
Ford, Jason Fuller, Pierce Gaithe, Richard Green, Christos--- 
Hackler, Adam Hennebeck, Sterling Hershey. Paul Hughes 
Gregory L. Harris, Yan Lacharite, Shane Leahy, Ryan Lear 
Tom lornmel, Jonathan Longstaff, Rory Madden, Matt 
Maranda, Derek McIntosh, Paul Melamed, Shawn Merw n 
Lou Michelli, Mike Mihalas, David Milman, Daren Mitche 
Matthew Mosher, David Muller, Kevin Neff, Adam Page. : 
Proudfoot, Max Reich [in, Karl Resch, Matthew Roister, z?: - 
Romein, Sam Sherry, Pieter Sleijpen, Robin Stacey, Dav d 
"Oak" Stark, Adam Strong-Morse, Arthur Wright 



ON THE COVER 

Tyler Jacobson illustrates the archlich Acererak 
as he raises an army of undead and prepares to 
unleash it on an unsuspecting world. 


620A9219000001 EN 
ISBN: 97S-0-7S69-6562-S 
First Printing:: December 2014 

9 S 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 



Ditch itrier. Wizards of the Coast does not officially endorse the follow ng . * - :..: - maximize your enjoyment os a Dungeon Master first, always keep o straight fact ana 

say OK no matter ho w indie roui or doomed the players' plan of action : Zr: - : ■:: . pre tend that you intended oil along for everything to unfold the way it did. Hurd, j 

you're not sure what to do next, feign illness, end the session early, and p ;: ,;. -;.f w - - -- \r fails, r 0 i7 o bunch of dice behind your screen* study them for o moment with a loo* of 

deep concern mixed with regret, let loose a heavy sigh t and announce :hat " - r , onP acae&s. 

DUNGEONS Str ORAGQNS, D&D, Wizards of the Coait. Forgotten Re^ ■£ : ; : layer's Handbook, Monster Manual, Dungeon Master’s Guide, all other Wizards of 

the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks c? * : : - -rd other countries. AIF characters and their distinctive likenesses are property 

of Wizards of the Coast. This material is protected under the copyright : c I • •= ■:'; :A —e--ca. Ary reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contains 

hereto is prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards t Zcj-st 

Printed In the USA. ©2014 Wizards of the Coast LLC, PO Bok 7G7, Rente- "I” M = - .situfed by Hasbro 5 A, Rue Emik'Bof chat 31,2$iQ0 Deldmoot, CHL 

Represented bv Hasbro Europe. 4 The Square. Stock!EvJPatkJUxb rrdfle. : -—LIE ILL. -— 































Contents 


Introduction 4 

The Dungeon Master.............4 

How to Use This Book... ,.4 

Know Your Players______........._.,.6 

Part 1 i 


Chapter 1: A World of Your Own... 

The Big Picture....... 

Gods of Your World...,.... 

Mapping Your Campaign, .„.... 

Settlements.....,,.,,......,.... 

Languages and Dialects.,.,.,.,. 

Factions and Organizations... 

Magic in Your World........ 

Creating a Campaign... 

Campaign Events...... 

Pl ay Style...... ...... 

Tiers of Play........ 

Flavors of Fantasy..... 


Chapter 2: Creating a Multiverse., 


The Planes —-. 

Planar Travel.... 

Astral Plane...... 

Ethereal Plane.. 

Feywild..... 

Shadowfell......... 

Inner Planes. 

Outer Planes. 

Other Planes...,, 



Known Worlds of the Material Plane 


....9 

....9 

..10 

.,14 

„15 

.20 

..21 

.23 

.25 

.26 

.34 

.36 

.38 

.43 
.43 
.44 
.46 
.48 
,49 
..51 
.52 
. 57 
.67 
.68 


Pa rt 2 


69 


Chapter 3: Creating Adventures 

Elements of a Great Adventure.... 

Published Adventures....... 

Adventure Structure...... 

Adventure Types...... 

Complications...... 

Creating Encou nters ______ 

Random Encounters.............. 


.71 

..71 

.72 

.72 

.72 

.79 

,81 

,85 


Chapter 4: Creating Nonplayer 

Characters........ 

Designing NPCs....... 

NPC Party Members...... 

Contacts...,............ 

Hirelings... 

Extras........... 

Villains....... 

Villainous Class Options... 


.89 

.89 

.92 

.93 

..... 94 

.94 

..... 94 
.....96 


Chapter 5: Adventure Environments.,.99 


Dungeons... 

Mapping a Dungeon.... 

Wilderness,.,. 

Mapping a Wilderness 
Wilderness Survival.... 

Settlements... 

Mapping a Settlement. 
Urban Encounters........ 


■ m n 


a 




..99 

... 102 

... 106 
... 108 

...109 

...112 

.114 

..,.114 


Unusual Environments..,.,,,.. 116 

TV ans 

A I U. O -i s t e 4 a r e i- ■ -F a -i- ■ r ■ r ■ ■ i ■ ■! ■ r ■ -r ■ ■■ ■ -■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ n ■ j ■ I! ■ ■ ■ J ■ ■ ■ I. ■ ■ 1 I. ■ I 1 .1. I I fc J fi t J a 4 . i 4 i. J. -ifr-i 

Chapter 6: Between Adventures....125 

Linking Adventures...........125 

Campaign Tracking,.. 126 

Recurring Expenses...............126 

Downtime Activities.......... 127 

Chapter 7: Treasure,..,., .......,133 

Types of Treasure.....133 

Random Treasure... 133 

Magic Items........_____135 

Sentient Magic Items..,.. 214 

Artifacts,... 219 

Other Rewards...........227 

Part 3 233 


Chapter 8: Running the Game .235 

Table Rules.....,......,.,..,,,.,,,. 235 

The Role of Dice.........236 

Using Ability Scores. 237 

Exploration....2 42 

Social Interaction.... 244 

Objects..............,246 

Combat_____,.__247 

Chases..«...... 252 

Siege Equipment.. 255 

Diseases ... 256 

Poisons...........257 

Madness.... 258 

Experience Points...... 260 

Chapter 9: Dungeon Master's 

Workshop.. ..263 

Ability Options. .263 

Adventuring Options..... .........266 

Combat Options.. 270 

Creating a Monster...........273 

Creating a Spell..................,,, 283 

Creating a Magic Item .....284 

Creating New Character Options......,285 

Appendix A: Random Dungeons 290 

Start i ng A rea......... 290 

Passages... 290 

Doors............291 

Chambers —......... 291 

Stairs........... 291 

Connecting Areas. ......292 

Stocking a Dungeon,.,... 292 

Appendix B: Monster Lists 302 


Appendix C: Maps 310 


Appendix D: Dungeon 

Master Inspiration 316 


Index 317 



Introduction 

T) 

T S GOOD TO &E THE DUNGEON MASTER! NOT ONLY 
do you get to tell fantastic stories about heroes, 
villains, monsters, and magic, but you also get 
to create the world in which these stories live. 
Whether you Ye running a D&D game already 
or you think it s something you want to try. this 
book is for you. 

The Dungeon Master's Guide assumes that you know 
the basics of how to play the D&D tabletop roleplaying 
game. If you havenY played before, the DUNGEONS eP 
Dragons Starter Set is a great starting point for new 
players and DMs. 

This book has two important companions; the Players 
Handbook, which contains the rules your players need 
to create characters and the rules you need to run the 
game, and the Monster Manual . which contains ready-lo¬ 
use monsters to populate your D&D world. 

The Dungeon Master 

The Dungeon Master (DM) is the creative force 
behind a D&D game. The DM creates a world for the 
other players to explore, and also creates and runs 
adventures that drive the story. An adventure typically 
hinges on the successful completion of a quest, and 
can be as short as a single game session. Longer 
adventures might embroil players in great conflicts that 
require multiple game sessions to resolve. When strung 
together, these adventures form an ongoing campaign, 

A D&D campaign can include dozens of adventures and 
last for months or years, 

A Dungeon Master gets to wear many hats. As the 
architect of a campaign, the DM creates adventures 
by placing monsters, traps, and treasures for the other 
players’ characters (the adventurers) to discover. As 
a storyteller, the DM helps the other players visualize 
what's happening around them, improvising when the 
adventurers do something or go somewhere unexpected. 
As an actor, the DM plays the roles of the monsters and 
supporting characters, breathing life into them. And as a 
referee, the DM interprets the rules and decides when to 
abide by them and when to change them. 

Inventing, writing, storytelling, improvising, acting, 
refereeing—every DM handles these roles differently, 
and you’ll probably enjoy some more than others. It 
helps to remember that Dungeons & Dragons is a 
hobby, and being the DM should be fun. Focus on the 
aspects you enjoy and downplay the rest. For example, if 
you don't like creating your own adventures, you can use 
published ones. You can also lean on the other players 
to help you with rules mastery and world-building. 

The D&D rules help you and the other players have 
a good time, but the rules aren't in charge. You Ye the 
DM, and you are in charge of the game. That said, your 
goal isn't to slaughter the adventurers but to create a 
campaign world that revolves around their actions and 
decisions, and to keep your players coming back for 
more! If you Ye lucky, the events of your campaign will 
echo in the memories of your players long after the final 
game session is concluded. 


How to Use This Book 

This book is organized in three parts. The first part 
helps you decide what kind of campaign you'd like to 
run. The second part helps you create the adventures— 
the stories—that will compose the campaign and 
keep the players entertained from one game session 
to ihe next. The last part helps you adjudicate the 
rules of the game and modify them to suit the style of 
your campaign. 

Part 1 : Master of Worlds _ 

Every DM is the creator of his or her own campaign 
world. Whether you invent a world, adapt a world from 
a favorite movie or novel, or use a published setting for 
the D&D game, you make that world your own over the 
course of a campaign. 

The world where you set your campaign is one of 
countless worlds that make up the D&D multiverse. 
a vast array of planes and worlds where adventures 
happen. Even if you re using an established world such 
as the Forgotten Realms, your campaign takes place 
in a sort of mirror universe of the official setting where 
Forgotten Realms novels, game products, and digital 
games are assumed to take place. The world is yours to 
change as you see fit and yours to modify as you explore 
the consequences of the players' actions. 

Your world is more than just a backdrop for 
adventures. Like Middle Earth. Westeros, and countless 
other fantasy worlds out there, it’s a place to which you 
can escape and witness fantastic stories unfold. A well- 
designed and well-run world seems to flow around the 
adventurers, so that they feel part of something, instead 
of apart from it. 

Consistency is a key to a believable fictional 
world. When the adventurers go back into town for 
supplies, they should encounter the same nonplayer 
characters (NPCs) they met before. Soon, they'll learn 
the bat-keep's name, and he or she will remember 
theirs as well. Once you have achieved this degree of 
consistency, you can provide an occasional change. If 
the adventurers come back to buy more horses at the 
stables, they might discover that the man who ran the 
place went back home to the large city over the hills, 
and now his n iece runs the family business. That sort of 
change—one that has nothing to do with the adventurers 
directly, but one that they'll notice—makes the players 
feel as though their characters are part of a living world 
that changes and grows along with them. 

Part 1 of this book is all about inventing your world. 
Chapter 1 asks what type of game you want to run, and 
helps you nail down a few important details about your 
world and its overarching conflicts. Chapter 2 helps you 
put your world in the greater context of the multiverse, 
expanding on the information presented in the Player's 
Handbook to discuss die planes of existence and the 
gods and how you can put them together to serve the 
needs of your campaign. 



4 


I ntroductjon 
















V 




l rL 


-J'5 


SK? 


Part 2 : Master of Adventures 

Whether you write your own adventures or use 
published ones, expect to invest preparation time 
beyond the hours you spend at the gaming table. You"II 
need to carve out some free time to exercise your 
creativity as you invent compelling plots, create new 
NPCs. craft encounters, and think of clever ways to 
foreshadow story events yet to come. 

Part 2 of this book is devoted to helping you create 
and run great adventures. Chapter 3 covers the basic 
elements of a D&D adventure, and chapter 4 helps you 
create memorable NPCs. Chapter 5 presents guidelines 
and advice for running adventures set in dungeons, 
the wilderness, and other locales, and chapter 6 covers 
the time between adventures. Chapter 7 is all about 
treasure, magic items, and special rewards that help 
keep the players invested in your campaign. 

Part 3 : Master of Rules 


Dungeons & Dragons isn’t a head-to-head competition, 
but it needs someone who is impartial yet involved in the 
game to guarantee that everyone at the table plays by the 
rules. As the player who creates the game world and the 
adventures that take place within it, the DM is a natural 
fit to take on the referee role. 

As a referee, the DM acts as a mediator between the 
rules and the players. A player tells the DM what he or 
she wants to do, and the DM determines whether it is 
successful or not. in some cases asking rhe player to 
make a die roll to determine success. For example, if a 
player wants his or her character to take a swing at an 
ore. you say, "Make an attack roll" while looking up the 
ore’s Armor Class. 

The rules don’t account for every possible situation 
that might arise during a typical D&D session. For 


example, a player might want his or her character to 
hud a brazier full of hot coals into a monster s face. 

How you determine the outcome of this action is up to 
you. You might tell the player to make a Strength check, 
while mentally setting the Difficulty Class (DC) at 15. 

If the Strength check is successful, you then determine 
how a face full of hot coals affects the monster. You 
might decide that it deals ld4 fire damage and imposes 
disadvantage on the monster's attack rolls until the end 
of its next turn. You roll the damage die (or let the player 
do it), and the game continues. 

Sometimes mediating the rules means setting limits. 
If a player tells you, "1 want to run up and attack the 
ore/’ but the character doesn’t have enough movement 
to reach the ore, you say, “It’s too far away to move up 
and still attack. What would you like to do instead?"’ 

The player takes the information and comes up with a 
different plan. 

To referee the rules, you need to know them. You don’t 
have to memorize this book or the Player’s Handbook, 
but you should have a clear idea of their contents so that, 
when a situation requires a ruling, you know^ where to 
find the proper reference. 

The Player's Handbook contains the main rules you 
need to play the game. Part 3 of this book offers a wealth 
of information to help you adjudicate the rules in a wide 
variety of situations. Chapter 8 presents advice for using 
attack rolls, ability checks, and saving throws. It also 
includes options appropriate for certain play styles and 
campaigns, including guidelines for using miniatures, 
a system for handling chase scenes, and rules for 
madness. If you like to create your own stuff, such 
as new monsters, races, and character backgrounds, ng elements to combat encounters, 

* incorporating elements from their characters' back¬ 
grounds into your adventures. 

Exploring _ 

Players who desire exploration want to experience the 
wonders that a fantasy world has to offer. They want to 
know what's around the next corner or hill. They also 
like to find hidden clues and treasure. 

Engage players who like exploration by 

* dropping clues that hint at things yet to come. 

- letting them find things when they take the time 
to explore. 

- providing rich descriptions of exciting environments, 
and using interesting maps and props, 

* giving monsters secrets to uncover or cultural 
details to learn. 

Instigating _ 

Player’s who like to instigate action are eager to make 
things happen, even if that means taking perilous risks. 
They would rather rush headlong into danger and face 
the consequences than face boredom. 

Engage players who like to instigate by ... 

* allowing them to affect their surroundings. 

* including things in your adventures to tempt them. 

* letting their actions put the characters in a tight spot, 

* including encounters with NPCs who are as feisty and 
unpredictable as they are. 


Fighting 

Players who enjoy fantasy combat like kicking the 
tar out of villains and monsters. They look for any 
excuse lo start a fight, favoring bold action over careful 
deliberation. 

Engage playerse. They like it when their characters are heavily 
invested in an unfolding story, and they enjoy encounters 
that are, tied to and expand an overarching plot. 

Engage players who like storytelling by ... 

* using their characters’ backgrounds to help shape the 
stories of the campaign. 

* making sure an encounter advances the story 
in some way. 

* making their characters' actions help steer 
future events. 

* giving NPCs ideals, bonds, and flaws that the adven¬ 
turers can exploit. 



6 


INTRODUCTION 































Worlds 


Master 


























, 


r A 

vm 


r 

f 


A 

I 

j V 

J Jfl 


rS'T 


t 

M -Vmr 


.**■ fi ■ 1 






r *v. 

^%4y 



f jLjjfl 








r ^ 




af.‘ j 

jAk^ - 

























^_W ... 1 .1 



t - 


« 










































Chapte r 1: A World of Your Own 



OUR WORLD IS T HE SETTING I OR YOUR CAMPAIGN, 
the place where adventures ha] j pen. Even 
if you use an existing setting, such as the 
Forgotten Realms, It becomes yours as you 
set your adventures there, create characters 
to inhabit it, and make changes to it over 
the course of your campaign. This chapter is all about 
building your world and then creating a campaign to 
take place in it. 


The Big Picture 

This book, the Players Handbook, and the Monster 
Manual present the default assumptions for how the the great forest unless 
they’ve been there themselves. 

The World Is Ancient. Empires rise and fal! t leaving 
few places that have not been touched by imperial 
grandeur or decay. War, time, and natural forces 
eventually claim the mortal world, leaving it rich with 
places of adventure and mystery. Ancient civilizations 
and their knowledge survive in legends, magic 
items, and their ruins. Chaos and evil often follow' an 
empire’s collapse. 

Conflict Shapes the World's History. Powerful 
individuals strive to make their mark on the world, and 
factions of like-minded individuals can alter the course 
of history. Factions include religions led by charismatic 
prophets, kingdoms ruled by lasting dynasties, and 
shadowy societies that seek to master long-lost magic. 
The influence of such factions waxes and wanes as 


they compete with each other for power. Some seek to 
preserve the world and usher in a golden age. Others 
strive toward evil ends, seeking to rule the world with 
an iron fist. Still others seek goals that range from 
the practical to the esoteric, such as the accumulation 
of material wealth or the resurrection of a dead god. 
Whatever their goals, these factions inevitably collide, 
creating conflict that can steer the world's fate. 

The World Is Magical Practitioners of magic are 
relatively few in number, but they leave evidence of 
their craft everywhere. The magic can be as innocuous 
and commonplace as a potion that heals wounds to 
something much more rare and impressive, such as a 
levitating tower or a stone golem guarding the gates 
of a city. Beyond the realms of civilization are caches 
of magic items guarded by magic traps, as well as 
magically constructed dungeons inhabited by monsters 
created by magic, cursed by magic, or endowed with 
magical abilities. 

It’s Your World 

In creating your campaign world, it helps to start with 
the core assumptions and consider how your setting 
might change them. The subsequent sections of this 
chapter address each element and give details on how to 
flesh out your world with gods, factions, and so forth. 

The assumptions sketched out above aren’t carved 
in stone. They inspire exciting D&D worlds full of 
adventure, hut they’re not the only set of assumptions 
that can do so. You can build an interesting campaign 
concept by altering one or more of those core 
assumptions, just as well-established D&D worlds have 
done. Ask yourself, “What if the standard assumptions 
weren't true in my world?” 

The World Is a Mundane Place. What if magic is rare 
and dangerous, and even adventurers have limited or no 
access to it? What if your campaign is set in a version of 
our own world's history? 

The World Is New. What if your world is new, and 
the characters are the Dark Sun setting, the 
gods are extremely distant—perhaps nonexistent—and 
clerics rely instead on elemental power for their magic. 

Gods of Your World 

Appendix B of the Players Handbook presents a 
number of pantheons (loose groupings of deities not 
united by a single doctrine or philosophy) for use in your 
game, including the gods of established D&D worlds 
and fantasy-historical pantheons. You can adopt one of 
these pantheons for your campaign, or pick and choose 
deities and ideas from them as you please. See “A 
Sample Pantheon h in this section for an example. 

As far as the game's rules are concerned, it doesn't 
matter if your world has hundreds of deities or a church 
devoted to a single god. In rules terms, clerics choose 
domains, not deities, so your world can associate 
domains w ith deities in any way you choose. 

Loose Pantheons _ 

Most D&D worlds have a loose pantheon of gods, 

A multitude of deities rule the various aspects of 
existence, variously cooperating with and competing 
against one another to administer the affairs of the 
universe. People gather in public shrines to worship 
gods of life and wisdom, or meet in hidden places to 
venerate gods of deception or destruction. 

Each deity in a pantheon has a portfolio and is 
responsible for advancing that portfolio. In the 
Grcyhawk setting, Beironeous is a god of valor who 


calls cleual gods important to the 
community, while smaller settlements might have a 
single shrine devoted to any gods the locals revere. 

To quickly build a pantheon for your world, create 
a single god for each of the eight domains available 
to clerics: Death, Knowledge, Life, Light, Nature, 
Tempest, Trickery, and War. You can invent names 
and personalities for these deities, or borrow deities 
from other pantheons. This approach gives you a small 
pantheon that covers the most significant aspects of 
existence, and it’s easy enough to extrapolate other 
areas of life each deity controls. The god of Know ledge, 


Dawn War Deities 


Deity 

Alignment 

Suggested Domains 

Symbol 

Asmodeus, god of tyranny 

LE 

Tricke ry 

Three triangles in tight formation 

Avandra, goddess of change and luck 

CG 

Trickery 

Three stacked wavy lines 

Bahamut, god of justice and nobility 

LG 

Life, War 

Dragon’s head, in profile, facing left 

Bane, god of war and conquest 

LE 

War 

Claw with three talons pointing down 

Corellon, god of magic and the arts 

CG 

Light 

Eight-pointed star 

Erathis, goddess of civilization and invention 

IN 

Knowledge 

Upper half of a clockwork gear 

Gruumsh, god of destruction 

CE 

Tempest, War 

Triangular eye with bony protrusions 

loun, goddess of knowledge 

N 

Knowledge 

Crook shaped like a stylized eye 

Kord, god of strength andedition Players 
Handbook (2008), The pantheon is summarized in the 
Dawn War Deit ies table. 

This pantheon draws in several nonhuman deities 
and establishes them as universal gods* These gods 
include Bahamut, Corel Ion, Gruumsh, Lolth, Moradin. 
Sehanine, and Tiamat. Humans worship Moradin and 
Corellon as gods of their respective portfolios, rather 
than as racial deities* The pantheon also includes the 
archdevil Asmodeus as god of domination and tyranny. 

Several of the gods are drawn from other pantheons, 
sometimes with new names for the gods* Bane comes 
from the Forgotten Realms* From Greyhawk come 
Kord, Pelor* Tharizdun* and Vecna* From the Greek 
pantheon come Athena (renamed Erathis) and Tyche 
(renamed Avandra), though both are altered. Set 
(renamed Zehir) comes from Hie Egyptian pantheon. 

The Raven Queen is akin to the Norse pantheon's Hel 
and Grey hawk’s Weejas* That leaves three gods created 
from scratch: Ioun, Melora, and Torog, 

Other Reli gious Systems _ 

In your campaign, you can create pantheons of gods 
who are closely linked in a single religion, monotheistic 
religions (worship of a single deity), dualistic systems 
(centered on two opposing deities or forces), mystery 
cults (involving personal devotion to a single deity* 
usually as part of a pantheon system)* animistic 
religions (revering the spirits inherent in nature), or 
even forcesies serve as an example of a tight 
pantheon, Odin is the pantheon's leader and father 
figure* Deities such as Thor, Tyr, and Freya embody 
important aspects of Norse culture. Meanwhile, Loki 
and his devotees lurk in the shadows* sometimes aiding 
the other deities, and sometimes working against them 
with the pantheon’s enemies. 

Mystery Cults 

A mystery cult is a secretive religious organization 
based on a ritual of initiation* in which the initiate is 
mystically identified with a god. or a handful of related 
gods. Mystery cults are intensely personal, concerned 
with the initiate s relationship with the divine. 

Sometimes a mystery cult is a type of worship within 
a pantheon. It acknowledges the myths and rituals of 
the pantheon, but presents its own myths and rites as 
primary. For instance, a secretive order of monks might 
immerse themselves in a mystical relationship to a god 
who is part of a broadly worshiped pantheon* 

A mystery cult emphasizes the history of its god, 
which is symbolically reenacted in its initiation ritual, 
fhe foundation myth of a mystery cult is usually simple 
and often involves a god s death and rising, or a journey 
to the underworld and a return. Mystery cults often 
revere sun and moon deities and agricultural deities— 
gods whose portfolios reflect the cycles of nature. 


Divine Rank 

The divine beings of the multiverse are often categorized 
according to their cosmic power. Some gods are worshiped 
on multiple worlds and have a different rank on each world, 
depending on their influence there* 

Greater deities are beyond mortal understanding. They 
can't be summoned, and they are almost always removed 
from direct involvement in mortal affairs. On very rare 
occasions they manifest avatars similar to lesser deities, but 
slaying a greater god’s avatar has no effect on the god itself 
Lesser deities are embodied somewhere in the planes. 
Some lesser deities live in the Material Plane, as does the 
unicorn-goddess Lurue of the Forgotten Realms and the 
titanic shark-god Sekolah revered by the sahuagin. Others 
live on the Outer Planes, as Lolth does in the Abyss. Such 
deities can be encountered by mortals. 

Quasi-deities have a divine origin, but they don't hear or 
answer prayers, grant spells to clerics, or control aspects of 
mortal life. They are still immensely powerful beings, and in 
theory they could ascend to god hood If they amassed enough 
worshipers. Quasi-deities fall into three subcategories: 
demigods, titans, and vestiges. 

Demigods are born from the union of a deity and a mortal 
being. They have some divine attributes, but their mortal 
parentage makes them the weakest quasi-deities. 

Titans are the divine creations of deities. They might be 
birthed from the union of two o aren’t deities 
(possibly including powerful aberrations, celestials, fey, 
fiends, or elementals), or simply by their faith. 

The deity of a monotheistic religion has an extensive 
portfolio and is portrayed as the creator of everything, in 
control of everything, and concerned with every aspect 
of existence. Thus, a worshiper of this god offers prayers 
and sacrifices to the same god regardless of what 
aspect of life is in need of divine assistance. Whether 
marching into war, setting off on a journey, or hoping 
to win someone’s affections, the worshiper prays to 
the same god. 

Some monotheistic religions describe different 
aspects of their deity. A single god appears in different 
aspects as the Creator and the Destroyer, and the clerics 
of that god focus on one aspect or the other, determining 
their domain access and possibly even their alignment 
on that basis. A cleric who venerates the Destroyer 
aspect chooses the Tempest or War domain, while 
one who worships a Creator aspect chooses the Life 
or Nature domains. In some monotheistic religions, 
clerics group themselves into distinct religious orders to 
differentiate clerics who choose different domains. 

Dualism 

A dualistic religion views the world as the stage for 
a conflict between two diametrically opposed deities 
or divine forces. Most often, the opposed forces are 
good and evil, or opposed deower to 
protect them from the evil deity’s minions. Because 
the evil deity in such a religion is usually the source 
of everything that is detrimental to existence, only the 
perverse and depraved worship this god. Monsters 
and fiends serve it, as do certain secretive cults. The 
myths of a dualistic religion usually predict that the 
good deity will triumph in an apocalyptic battle, but the 
forces of evil believe that the outcome of that battle isn't 
predetermined and work to promote their deity’s victory. 

Deities in a dualistic system maintain large portfolios. 
All aspects of existence reflect the dualistic struggle, 
and therefore all things can fall on one side or the other 
of the conflict. Agriculture, mercy, the sky, medicine, 
and poetry reside in the portfolio of the good deity, and 
famine, hatred, disease, and war belong to the evil deity. 

Animism 

Animism is the belief that spirits inhabit every part of 
the natural world. In an animistic worldview, everything 
has a spirit, from the grandest mountain to the lowliest 
rock, from the great ocean to a babbling brook, from the 
sun and moon to a fighter’s ancestral sword. All these 
objects, and the spirits that inhabit them, are sentient, 
though some are more aware, alert, and intelligent 
than others. The most powerful spirits might even 
be considered deities. All are worthy of respect if not 
veneom deities. 

In some campaigns, believers hold enough conviction 
in their ideas about the universe that they gain magical 
power from that conviction. In other campaigns, 
impersonal forces of nature or magic replace the gods 
by granting power to mortals attuned to them. Just as 
druids and rangers can gain their spell ability from the 
force of nature rather than from a specific nature deity, 
some clerics devote themselves to ideals rather than to 
a god. Paladins might serve a philosophy of justice and 
chivalry rather than a specific deity. 

Forces and philosophies aren’t worshiped; they aren't 
beings that can hear and respond to prayers or accept 
sacrifices. Devotion to a philosophy or a force isn’t 
necessarily exclusive of service to a deity. A person can 
be devoted to the philosophy of good and offer worship 
to various good deities, or revere the force of nature 
and also pay homage to the gods of nature, who might 
be seen as personal manifestations of an impersonal 
force. In a world that includes deities with demonstrable 
power (through their clerics), it’s unusual for a 
philosophy to deny the existence of deities, although a 
common philosophical belief states that the deities are 
more like mortals than they would have mortals believe. 
According to such philosophies, the gods aren't truly 
immortal (just very long-lived), and mortals can attain 
diso thoroughly ingrained in 
dwarven culture that it would take a cataclysmic shift to 
replace him. 

With that in mind, consider the role of the gods in 
your world and their ties to different humanoid races. 
Does each race have a creator god? How does that god 


shape that race's culture? Are other folk free of such 
divine ties and free to worship as they w ish? Has a race 
turned against the god that created it? Has a new race 
appeared, created by a god within the past few years? 

A deity might also have ties to a kingdom, noble 
line, or other cultural institution. With the death of 
the emperor, a new ruler might be selected by divine 
portents sent by the deity who protected the empire in 
its earliest days. In such a land, the worship of other 
gods might be outlawed or tightly controlled. 

Finally, consider the difference between gods who 
are tied to specific humanoid races and gods with 
more diverse followers. Do the races with their own 
pantheons enjoy a place of privilege in your world, with 
their gods taking an active role in their affairs? Are the 
other races ignored by the gods, or are those races the 
deciding factor that can tilt the balance of power in favor 
of one god or another? 


CHAPTER i 


A 1 V r ORLD OF YOUR OWN 








Stillwater, 


ifmrtt’ 1 '' V^* 

ff - " 9 • ™ .4 

Shimmer f 


Rock Island 
V^lo\vcr if;' 


Rock Island 




ari region might include islands offshore, and a 
landlocked area might include an inland sea or major 
lakes. Alternatively, the region could consist of a single 
large island, or an isthmus or peninsula w ith multiple 
coastlines. 

Next, sketch in any major mountain ranges* Foothills 
form a transition between the mountains and lowlands* 
and broad patches of gentle hills might dot the region. 

That leaves the rest of your map for relatively flat 
terrain: grasslands, forests, swamps, and the like* Place 
these elements as you see fit. 

Map out the courses of any rivers that flow through 
the area. Rivers are born in mountains or inland areas 
that see a lot of rainfall, winding down to the nearest 
major body of water that doesn't require the river to 
cross over higher elevation. Tributaries join rivers as 
they grow larger and move toward a lake or the sea* 
finally, place the major towns and cities of the region. 
At this scale, you don’t need to worry about small towns 
and villages, or about mapping every belt of farmland. 
Even so, a settled region this size might easily have 
eight to t welve cities or towns to put on the map* 

Continent Scale 


Province Scale __ 

For the most detailed areas of your world, use a 
province scale where each hex represents 1 mile. A 
full-page map at this scale represents an area that 
can be covered in one day s travel in any direc to twelve large cities that 
deserve a place on the map, most likely major trade 
centers and the capitals of kingdoms. 

Combining Scales 

Whichever scale you start with, it's easy to zoom in or 
out on your maps. At continent scale. I hex represents 
the same area as 10 kingdom-scale hexes. Two cities 
that are 3 hexes (180 miles) apart on your continent 
map would be 30 hexes apart on your kingdom map, 
and might define the opposite ends of the region you’re 
detailing* At kingdom scale, 1 hex equals 6 province- 
scale hexes, so it’s easy to put the region covered by your 
province-scale map into the center of a kingdom-scale 
map and create interesting areas around it. 


CliA 



A WORLD or YOUR OWN 



























Settlements 

The places where people live-hustling cities, 
prosperous towns, and tiny villages nestled among 
miles of farmland—help define the nature of civilization 
in your world* A single settlement—a home base for 
your adventurers—is a great place to start a campaign 
and begin your world building. Consider the following 
questions as you create any settlement in your world: 

* What purpose does it serve in your game? 

« How big is it? Who lives there? 

* What does it look, smell, and sound like? 

* Who governs it? Who else holds power? Is it part 
of a larger state? 

- What arc its defenses? 

- Where do characters go to fiu dont have to. If the characters 
return to the same settlement, start adding these local 
features so that it begins to fee! a little more like a home 
base, albeit a temporary one. Let the settlement develop 
as the need arises. 

Home Base 

A settlement gives the adventurers a place to live, 
train, and recuperate between adventures. An entire 
campaign can center on a particular town or city. 

Such a settlement is the launching pad from which the 
characters go out into the wider world. 

Designed well a home base can hold a special place 
in the adventurers' hearts, particularly if they care about 
one or more NPCs who live there. 






























To make a home base come alive, yoiill need to 
invest some time fleshing out details, but the players 
can help you with that work. Ask them to tell you a bit 
about mentors, family members, and other important 
people in their characters lives. Feel free to add to and 
modify what they give you, but you'll start with a solid 
foundation of the nonplayer characters (MFCs) who are 
important to the characters. Let the players describe 
where and how their characters spend their time—a 
favorite tavern, library, or temple, perhaps. 

Using these MFCs and locations as a starting point, 
flesh out the settlement s cast of characters. Detail 
its leadership, including law enforcement (discussed 
later in the chapter). Include characters who can 
provide information, such as sages, soothsayers, 
librarians, and observant vagabonds. Priests can 
provide spellcasting as well as information. Make note 
of merchants who might regularly interact with the 
adventurers and perhaps compete with one another for 
the party’s business. Think about the people who run 
the adventurers' favorite tavern. And then add a handful 
of wild cards; a shady dealer, a mad prophet, a retired 
mercenary, a drunken rake, or anyone else who adds a 
dash of adventure and intrigue to your campaign. 

Adventure Site 

A village harboring a secret cult of devil worshipers. A 
town controlled by a guild of wererats, A city conquered 
by a hobgoblin army. These settlements aren't merely 
rest stops but locations where adventures unfold. In 
a settlement that doubles as an adventure location, 
detail the intended adventure areas, such as towers 
and warehouses. For an event-based adventure, note 
the NFCs who play a part in the adventure. This 
work is adventure preparation as much as it is world 
building, and the cast of characters you develop for 
your adventure—including allies, patrons, enemies, and 
extras—can become recurring figures in your campaign. 

Size 

Most settlements in a D&D world are villages clustered 
around a larger town or city. Farming villages supply the 
town or city population with food in the village center. At the heart of the 
village, a handful of structures duster together: a well, 
a marketplace, a small temple or two, a gathering place, 
and perhaps an inn for travelers. 

Town 

Population: Up to about 6.000 

Government; A resident noble rules and appoints a lord 
mayor to oversee administration. An elected town 
council represents the interests of the middle class. 
Defense: The noble commands a sizable army of 
professional soldiers, as well as personal bodyguards. 
Commerce: Basic supplies are readily available, though 
exotic goods and services are harder to find. Inns and 
taverns support travelers. 

Organizations: The town contains several temples, 
as well as various merchant guilds and other 
organizations. 

Towns are major trade centers, situated where important 
industries and reliable trade routes enabled the 
population to grow. These settlements rely on commerce: 
the import of raw materials and food from surrounding 
villages, and the export of crafted items to those villages, 
ns well as to other towns and cities. A towns population 
is more diverse than that of most villages. 

Towns arise where roads intersect waterways, at the 
meeting of major land trade routes, around strategic 
defensive locations, or near significant mines or similar 
natural resources. 

City 

Population: Up to about 25,000 
Government: A resident noble presideity council and their own noble 
administrators. 

Cities that hold more than twenty-five thousand people 
are extremely rare. Metropolises such as Waterdeep in 
the Forgotten Realms. Sham in Eberron, and the Free 
City of Grey hawk stand as vital beacons of civilization in 
the D&D worlds. 

Atmosphere 

What do the adventurers first notice as they approach 
or enter a settlement? The towering wall bristling 
with soldiers? The beggars with hands outstretched, 
pleading for aid outside the gate? The noisy hubbub of 
merchants and buyers thronging the marker square? 

The overpowering stench of manure? 

Sensory details help bring a settlement to life and 
vividly communicate its personality to your players. 
Settle on a single defining factor that sums up a 
settlement’s personality and extrapolate from there. 
Maybe a city is built around canals, like real-world 
Venice, That key element suggests a wealth of sensory 
details: the sight of colorful boats floating on muddy 
waters, the sound of lapping waves and perhaps singing 
gondoliers, the smells offish and waste polluting 
the water, the feel of humidity. Or perhaps the city is 
shrouded in fog much of the time, and you describe the 
tendrils of cold mist reaching through every crack and 
cranny, the muffled sounds of hooves on cobblestones, 
the cold air with the smell of rain, and a sense of 
mystery and lurking dangepoint officers as their agents in villages, to 
supervise the collection of taxes and serve as judges 
in disputes and criminal trials. These reeves, sheriffs, 
or bailiffs are commoners native to the villages they 
govern, chosen for their positions because they already 
hold the respect of their fellow citizens. 

Within towns and cities, lords share authority and 
administrative responsibility with lesser nobles (usually 
their own relatives), and also with representatives of 
the middle class, such as traders and artisans. A lord 
mayor of noble birth is appointed to head the town or 
city council and to perform the same administrative 
functions that reeves carry out in villages. The council 
consists of representatives elected by the middle class. 
Only foolish nobles ignore the wishes of their councils, 
since the economic power of the middle class is often 
more important to the prosperity of a town or city than 
the hereditary authority of the nobility. 

The larger a settlement, the more likely that other 
individuals or organizations hold significant power 
there as well. Even in a village, a popular individual—a 
wise elder or a well-liked farmer—can wield more 
influence than the appointed reeve, and a wise reeve 
avoids making an enemy of such a person. In towns 
and cities, the same power might lie in the hands of a 
prominent temple, a guild independent of td be immortal or undead* Aundair 
and Karrnath, two kingdoms in the Eberron campaign 
setting, have autocrats with royal blood in their veins* 
Whereas Queen Aurala of Aundair relies on wizards 
and spies to enforce her will, Kaius, the vampire king of 
Karrnath, has a formidable army of living and undead 
soldiers under his command. 

Bureaucracy, Various departments compose the 
government, each responsible for an aspect of rule* The 
department heads, ministers* or secretaries answer to a 
figurehead autocrat or council. 

Confederacy. Each individual city or town within 
the confederacy governs itself, but all contribute to a 
league or federation that promotes (at least in theory) 
the common good of all member states. Conditions and 
attitudes toward the central government vary from place 
to place within the confederacy. The Lords' Alliance in 
the Forgotten Realms setting is a loose confederacy of 
cities, while the Mror Holds in the Eberron campaign 
setting is a confederacy of allied dwarf clans. 

Democracy. Citizens or their elected representatives 
determine the laws in a democracy, A bureaucracy or 
military carries out the day-to-day work of government, 
with positions filled through open elections. 

Dictatorship. One supreme ruler holds absolute 
authority, but his or her rule isn't necessarily dynastic. 

In other respects this resembles an autocracy* In the 
Grey hawk campaign setting, a half-demon named Iuz is 
the dictator of a conquered land that bears his name. 

Feudalism. The typical government of Europe in 
the Middle Ages, a feudal!Stic society consists of layers 
of lords and vassals. The vassals provide soldiers or 
scutage (payment in lieu of military service) to the lords, 
who in turn promise protection to their vassals. 

Gerontocracy. Elders preside over this society. In 
some cases, long-lived races such as elves or dragons 
are entrusted with the leadership of the land. 

Hierarchy, A feudal or bureaucratic government 
where every member, except one, is subordinate to 
another member. In the Dragon la nee campaign setting, 
the dragonarmies of Krynn Form a military hierarchy, 
with the Dragon High lords as leaders under the dragon 
queen Takhists. 

Kleptocracy, This government is composed of groups 
or individuals primarily seeking wealth for themselves, 
often at the expense of their subjects. The grasping 
Bandit Kingdoms in the Grey hawk campaign setting 
are prime examples* A kingdom run by thieves guilds 
would also fall into this category. 

Magocracy, The governing body is composed of 
spellcasters who rule directly as oligarchs or feudal 
lords, or participate in a democracy or bureaucracy. 
Examples include the Red Wizards of Thay in the 
Forgotten Realms campaign setting and the sorcerer- 
kings of Athas districts or 
provinces under their control, or jointly ruling together. 
A group of adventurers who take control of a nation 
together might form an oligarchy. The Free City of 
reyhawk is an oligarchy composed of various faction 
f-aders, with a Lord Mayor as its figurehead. 

Plutocracy ; Society is governed by the wealthy. The 
[ i te form a r u 1 i n g cou nc 11. pu rob a s e re prese n t at ton a t 
he court of a figurehead monarch, or rule by default 
"cause money is the true power in the realm. Many 
c ities in the Forgotten Realms campaign setting, 
including Waterdeep and Baldurs Gate, are plutocracies. 

Republic . Government is entrusted to representatives 
if an established electorate who rule on behalf of the 
electors. Any democracy in which only landowners or 
ertain classes can vote could be considered a republic. 
Satrapy . Conquerors and representatives of another 
government wield power, ruling the settlement or region 
<s part of a larger empire. The satraps are bureaucrats 
md military officers, or unusual characters or monsters. 
The cities of Highport and Suderham in the Greyhawk 
campaign setting are satrapies controlled by agents of a 
vicious gang of marauders known as the Slave Lords. 
Theocracy , Rulership falls to a direct representative 
r a collection of agents of a deity. The centers of power 
n a theocracy are usually located on sacred sites. hey also carry news from town 
to town, including reports of situations that cry out for 
the attention of adventurers. 

These merchants can't provide the services normally 
found in a city. For instance, when the characters are in 
need of a library or a dedicated sage, a trainer who can 
handle the griffon eggs they've found, or an architect to 
design their castle, they're better off going to a large city 
than looking in a village. 

Cur rency _ 

The straightforward terms “gold piece" (gp), “silver 
piece'' (sp), “copper piece” (cp), “electrum piece" (ep), 
and “platinum piece 7 ' (pp) are used throughout the game 
rules for clarity. You can imbue these denominations 
wdth more interesting descriptions in your game 
world. People give coins specific names, whether 
as plain as “dime" or lively as “gold double-eagle.'' A 
country typically mints its own currency, which might 
correspond to the basic rules terms. In most worlds, few 
currencies achieve widespread distribution, but nearly 
all coins are accepted worldwide-^except by those 
looking to pick a fight with a foreigner 

Example: The Forgotten Realms 
The world of the Forgotten Realms provides an 
extensive example of currencies. Although barter, 
blood notes, and similar letters of trade are common 
enough in Faerfin, metal coins and trade bars are the 
everyday currency. 

Common Coinage . Goins 
issues a larger coin called an eclipsed moon* which 
looks like an electrum moon combined a darker silver 
wedge to form a round coin worth 5 ep within the city 
and 2 ep outside it* 

The favored form of currency in the kingdom of 
Cor my r is the royal coinage of the court* stamped with 
a dragon on one side and a treasury date mark on the 
other. There* coppers are called thumbs* silvers are 
silver falcons, electrum pieces are blue eyes, gold pieces 
are golden lions, and platinum coins are tricrowns. 

Even city-states mint their own copper, silver* and gold 
pieces* Electrum and platinum pieces are rarer in these 
lands. Smaller states use coinage borrowed from other 
nations and looted from ancient sources. Travelers from 
certain lands (notably the wizard-dominated realms of 
Thay and Halruaa) use the currencies of other realms 
when trading abroad because their own coins and 
tokens are feared to be magically cursed* and so are 
shunned by others. 

Conversely* the coins of long-lost, legendary lands 
and centers of great magic are honored, though those 
who hnd them are wise to sell them to collectors rather 
than merely spending them in markets. The coins of the 
old elven court of Cormanthyr are particularly famous: 
thalvers (coppers), bedoars (silvers), thammarchs 
(electrum), shilmaers (golds), and ruendils (platinum). 
These coins are fine, numerous* and sometithe Shaar* are worth 3 gp 
per slice. 

Creating Your Own 

As shown in the previous examples, currency doesn t 
need to obey a universal standard in your world. Each 
country and era can have its own coins with its own 
values. Your adventurers might travel through many 
different lands and find long-lost treasures. Finding 
- six hundred ancient bedoars from the rule of Coronal 
Ekargrim twelve centuries before offers a deeper sense 
of immersion in your world than finding 60 sp* 

Varying names and descriptions of coins for the 
major contemporary and historical realms of your world 
adds an additional layer of texture. The golden lions of 
Cormyr convey the noble nature of that kingdom. If a 
nation mints gold coins stamped with leering demonic 
faces and called torments, that currency expresses a 
distinct flavor. 

Creating new coins connected to specific locations* 
like the toals of Waterdeep or the eclipsed moons of 
Silvery moon, provides another level of detail. As long as 
you keep the value of these new coins simple (in other 
words* don't invent a coin worth T62 gp), you add local 
flavor to key locations in your world without adding 
undue complexity* 

Languages and Dialects 

When fleshing out your world, you can create new 
languages and dialects to reflect its unique geography 
and history. You can replace the default languages 
presented in the Players Handbnizations 


Temples, guilds, orders, secret societies, and 
colleges are important forces in the social order of 
my civilization. Their influence might stretch across 
multiple towns and cities, with or without a similarly 
wide-ranging political authority. Organizations can 
play an important part in the lives of player characters, 

; ecoming their patrons, allies, or enemies just like 
dividual nonplayer characters. When characters join 
these organizations, they become part of something 
arger than themselves, which can give their adventures 
a context in the wider world. 


Adventurers and Organizations 


At the start of a campaign, backgrounds are a great 
way to connect adventurers to your world. As the game 
progresses, though, background ties often become less 
mportant. 

Factions and organizations aimed at player characters 
ire a way to keep higher-level adventurers connected 
:o your world, providing ties to key NPCs and a clear 
agenda beyond individual gain. In the same way, 
villainous organizations create an ongoing sense of 
menace above and beyond the threat of solitary foes. 

Having different characters tied to different factions 
:an create interesting situations at the gaming table, as 
ng as those factions have similar goals and don't work 
r: opposition to one another all the time. Adventurers 


representing different factions might have competing 
time as needs warrant. The Harpers 7 
ideology is noble, and its members pride themselves on their 
ingenuity and incorruptibility. Harpers don't seek power or 
glory, only fair and equal treatment for all. 

Motto . "Down with tyranny. Fairness and equality for all?' 
Beliefs * The Harpers' beliefs can be summarized as follows: 


* One can never have too much information or arcane 
knowledge. 

* Too much power leads to corruption, and the abuse of 
magic in particular must be closely monitored. 

* No one should be powerless. 


Coats. Gather information throughout Faerun, discern 
the political dynamics within each region, and promote 
fairness and equality by covert means. Act openly as a last 
resort Thwart tyrants and any leader, government, or group 
that grows too powerful. Aid the weak, the poor, and the 
oppressed. 

Typrcu/Quests, Typical Harper quests include securing 
an artifact that would upset the balance of power in a 
region, gathering information on a powerful individual or 
organization, and determining the true intentions of an 
ambitious political figure or evil spellcaster. 


CHATTER I ! A WORLD Oi YOUR OWN 


21 






















give you a good sense of the organization's personality. 
From there, think about typical members. How might 
people describe them? What are the typical members' 
classes and alignments? What personality traits do they 
tnization. Renown is a numerical value that starts 
at 0, then increases as a character earns favor and 
reputation within a particular organization. You can tie 
benefits to a character's renown, including ranks and 
titles within the organization and access to resources. 

A player tracks renown separately for each 
organization his or her character is a member of. For 
example, an adventurer might have 5 renown within 
one faction and 20 renown within another, based on the 
character's interaction with each organization over the 
course of the campaign. 

Gaining Renown 

A character earns renown by completing missions or 
quests that serve an organization's interests or involve 
the organization directly. You award renown at your 
discretion as characters complete these missions 
or quests, typically at the same lime you award 
experience points. 

Examples of Faction Ranks 


Advancing an organization's interests increases 
a character's renown within that organization by 1. 
Completing a mission specifically assigned by that 
organization, or which directly benefits the organization, 
increases the character’s renown by 2 instead. 

For example, characters with connections to the noble 
Order of the Gauntlet complete a mission in which 
they free a town from the tyranny of a blue dragon. 
Because the order likes to punish evildoers, you might 
increase each character s rthe Lords' Alliance might have 
to be at least 5th level before becoming a stingblade. at 
least 10th level to be a warduke, and at least 15th level 
to be a lioncrown. 

You can set these thresholds of renown to any 
numbers that work for your game, creating appropriate 
ranks and titles for the organizations in your campaign. 

Attitudes of Organization Members* As a character's 
renown within an organization grows, members of 
that organization are increasingly likely to have heard 
of the character. You can set thresholds at which the 
default attitude of an organization’s members toward 
the character becomes indifferent or friendly. For 
example, members of the Emerald Enclave—a faction 


Renown 

Harpers 

Order of the Gauntlet 

Emerald Enclave 

Lord’s Alliance 

Zhentarim 

l 

Watcher 

Chevall 

Sprrngwarden 

Cloak 

Fang 

3 

Harpshadow 

Marcheon 

Summerstrider 

Redknife 

Wolf 

TO 

Srightcandie 

Whttehawk 

Autumn reaver 

Stingblade 

Viper 

25 

Wise Ow! 

Vindicator 

Winterstalker 

Warduke 

Ardragon 

50 

High Harper 

Righteous Hand 

Master of the Wild 

Lioncrown 

Dread Lord 


CH APTER 1 ! A WORLD OF YOU R OWN 









dedicated to preserving the natural order—might be 
less friendly toward characters who have not cultivated 
it least 3 renown within that organization, becoming 
friendly by default only when a character has gained 10ss of renown and rank within the organization. 

The extent of the loss depends on the infraction and is 
left to your discretion. A character's renown within an 
organization can never drop below 0, 

Piety 

With a few alterations, the renown system can also 
serve as a measure of a character's link to the gods. It's 
- great option for campaigns where the gods take active 
roles in the world. 

Using this approach, you track renown based on 
-pecific divine figures in your campaign. Each character 
has the option to select a patron deity or pantheon with 
_ ials, doctrine, and taboos that you have created. Any 
renown he or she earns is called piety. A character 
_ains piety for honoring his or her gods, fulfilling their 
mmands, and respecting their taboos. A character 
loses piety for working against those gods, dishonoring 
hem, defiling their temples, and foiling their aims. 

The gods bestow favors on those who prove their 
devotion. With each rank of piety gained, a character 
can pray for divine favor once per day. This favor usually 
:omes in the form of a cleric spell like bless . The favor 
: hen comes with a sign of the divine benefactor: for 
example ( a character dedicated to Thor might receive a 
spell accompanied by the boom of thunder, 

A high level of piety can also lead to a character 
gaining a more persistent benefit, in the form of a 
blessing or charm (see chapter 7, "Treasure,’ for such 
supernatural gifts). 


Magic in Your World 

In most D&D worlds, magic is natural but still wondrous 
and sometimes frightening. People everywhere know 
about magic, and most people see evidence of it at some 
point in their lives. It permeates the cosmos and moves 
through the ancient possessions of legendary heroes, 
the mysterious ruins of fallen empires, those touched 
by the gods, creatures born with supernatural power, 
and individuals who study the secrets of the multi verse. 
Histories and fireside tales are filled with the exploits of 
those who wield it. 

What normal folk know of magic depends on where 
they live and whether they know characters who 
practice magic. Citizens of an isolated hamlet might not 
have seen true magic used for generations and speak 
in whispers of the strange powers of the old hermit 
living in the nearby woods. In the city of Waterdeep 
in the Forgotten Realms setting, the Watchful Order 
of Magists and Protectors is a guild of wizards. These 
arcanists wish to make wizardry more accessible so the 
order’s members can profit from selling their services. 

Some D&D settings have more magic in them than 
others. On Athas, the harsh world of the Dark Sun 
setting, arcane magic is a hated practice that can drain 
life from the world. Much of Athas’s magic lies in the 
hands of evildoers. Conversely, in the world of Eberron, 
magic is as commonplace as any other commodity. 
Mercantile houses sell magic items and services to 


Sample Faction: The Zhentarim 

The Zhentarim {also known as the Black Network) is an 
unscrupulous shadow network that seeks to expand its 
influence and power throughout the Forgotten Realms. 

The public face of the Black Network appears relatively 
benign. It offers the best and cheapest goods and services, 
both iegal and illicit, thus destroying its competitors and 
making everyone dependent on it, 

A member of the Zhentarim thinks of himself or herself 
as a member of a very large family and relies on the Black 
Network for resources and security However, members are 
granted the autonomy to pursue their own interests and gain 
some measure of personal wealth and influence. As a whole, 
the Zhentarim promises “the best of the best, 1 ' although 
in truth the organization is more interested in spreading 
its own propaganda and influence than investing in the 
improvement of its individual members. 

Motto , “join us and prosper. Oppose us and suffer/ 1 
Beliefs. The ZhentarinVs beliefs can be summarized 
as follows: 

* The Zhentarim is your family You watch out for it, and it 
watches out for you, 

* You are the master of your own destiny. Never be less than 
what you deserve to be, 

* Everything and everyone has a price. 

Coeds, Amass mind, and to 
protect against it, especially in risky situations. 

Restrictions on Magic _ 

Some civilized areas might restrict or prohibit the use 
of magic. Spellcasting might be forbidden without a 
license or official permission. In such a place, magic 
items and continual magical effects are rare, with 
protections against magic being the exception. 

Some localities might prohibit specific spells. It could 
be a crime to cast any spells used to steal or swindle, 
such as those that bestow invisibility or produce 
illusions. Enchantments that charm or dominate others 
are readily outlawed, since they rob their subjects of 
free will. Destructive spells arc likewise prohibited, for 
obvious reasons, A local ruler could have a phobia about 
a specific effect or spell (such as shapeshifting effects if 
he or she were afraid of being impersonated) and enact 
a law restricting that type of magic. 

Schools of Magic _ 

The rules of the game refer to the schools of magic 
(abjuration, illusion, necromancy, and so on), but it’s 
up to you to determine what those schools signify in 
your world. Similarly, a few class options suggest the 
existence of magic-using organizations in the world— 
bardic colleges and druid circles—which are up to you to 
flesh out. 

You could decide that no formal structures like these 
exist in your world. Wizards (and bards and druids) 
mightteleport , and teleportation circle connect with these 
circles, which are found in temples, academies, the 
headquarters of arcane organizations, and prominent 
civic locations. However, since every teleportation circle 
is a possible means of entry into a city, they're guarded 
by military and magical protection. 

As you design a fantasy city, think about the 
teleportation circles it might contain and which ones 
adventurers are likely to know about, [f the adventurers 
commonly return to their home base by means of 
a teleportation circle, use that circle as a hook for 
plot developments in your campaign. What do the 
adventurers do if they arrive in a teleportation circle and 
find all the familiar wards disabled and guards lying 
in pools of blood? What if their arrival interrupts an 
argument between two feuding priests at the temple? 
Adventure ensues! 

Bringing Back the Dead _ 

When a creature dies, its soul departs its body, leaves 
the Material Plane, travels through the Astral Plane, 
and goes to abide on the plane where the creature s 
deity resides. If the creature didn’t worship a deity, its 
soul departs to the plane corresponding to its alignment. 
Bringing someone back from the dead means retrieving 
the soul from that plane and returning it to its body. 

Enemies can take steps to make it more difficult for 
a character to be returned from the dead. Keep as the campaign 
regresses. You're free to add as much or as little detail 
as you wish. 

The start of a campaign resembles the start of an 
iventure. You want to jump quickly into the action, 
'how the players that adventure awaits, and grab 
their attention right away. Give the players enough 
information to make them want to come back week after 
. vek to see how the story plays out. 


Start Small 


V. hen you first start building your campaign, start 
small, The characters need to know only about the 
y, town, or village where they start the game, and 
erhaps the nearby dungeon. You might decide that 
the barony is at war with a nearby duchy, or that a 
is slant forest is crawling with ettercaps and giant 
spiders, and you should note these things. But at 
he start of the game, the local area is enough to get 
:he campaign off the ground. Follow^ these steps to 
reate that local area: 


L Create a Home Base 
S ee the "Settlements' section earlier in this chapter 
for guidance on building this settlement. A small 
town or village at the edge of the wilderness serves 
- a fine home base in most D&D campaigns. Use 
. larger town or city if you want a campaign with 
: rba n adventuring. 


2 , Create a Local Region 
S ee "Mapping the Campaign" earlier in this chapter 
: r guidance. Draw a map at province scale (1 hex “ 

1 mile) with the home base near the center. Fill 
e and story you have in 
mind for your campaign. Then start working on your 
first adventure! 

Set the Stage 

As you start to develop your campaign, you'll need to 
fill in the players on the basics. For easy distribution, 
compile essential information into a campaign 
handout. Such a handout typically includes the 
following material: 

* Any restrictions or new options for character creation, 
such as new r or prohibited races, 

- Any information in the backstory of your campaign 
that the characters would know about. If you have 
a theme or direction in mind for the campaign, this 
information could include seeds hinting at that focus, 

* Basic information about the area where the characters 
are starting, such as the name of the town, important 
locations in and around it, prominent NPCs they’d 
know about, and perhaps rumors that point to trouble 
that’s brewing. 

Keep this handout short and to the point. Two pages 
is a reasonable maximum. Even if you have a burst of 
creative energy that produces twenty pages of great 
background material, save it for your adventures. Let 
the players uncover the details gradually in play. 

Involving the Characters 

Once you’ve identified what your campaign is about, 
let the players help tell the story by deciding how their 
characters are involved. This is their opportunity to 
tie their characters' history and backgroundarticular cultures, 
organizations, and historical events from your campaign 
are particularly strong. Perhaps the priests of a certain 
religion live as beggars supported by a pious populace, 
singing the tales of their deity’s exploits to entertain 
and enlighten the faithful. You could create a mendicant 
priest background (or modify the acolyte background) 
to reflect these qualities. It could include musical 
instrument proficiency, and its feature probably involves 
receiving hospitality from the faithful. 

Guidelines for creating a new background are 
provided in chapter 9, "Dungeon Master's Workshop.’" 

Campaign Events 

Significant events in the history of a fantasy world tend 
toward immense upheavals: wars that pit the forces 
of good against evil in an epic confrontation, natural 
disasters that lay waste to entire civilizations, invasions 
of vast armies or extra planar hordes, assassinations 
of world leaders. These world-shaking events title the 
chapters of history. 

In a D&D game, such events provide the sparks that 
can ignite and sustain a campaign. The most common 
pitfall of serial stories without a set beginning, middle, 
and end is inertia. Like many television shows and 
comic-book series, a D&D campaign runs the risk of 
retreading the same ground long after the enjoyment’s 
gone. Just as actors or writers drift away from those 
other mediums, ns, shaking their world 
again; failure seems imminent. At the end of the story, 
they succeed or fail and the world is shaken again by 
the way the characters changed it for good or ill. 

At the beginning of a D&D campaign, world-shaking 
events create instant adventure hooks and affect the 
characters’ lives directly, in the middle, they make great 
turning points as the characters' fortunes reverse- 
rising after a defeat or falling after a victory. Near 
the end of a campaign* such events serve as excellent 
climactic episodes with far-reaching effects. They might 
even occur after the story has ended, as a result of the 
characters’ actions. 

When Not to Shake It Up 

In constructing a narrative, beware of “false action," 
or action for its own sake. False action doesn't move 
a story forward, engage characters, or cause them to 
change. Many action movies suffer from false action, in 
which car chases, gunfights, and explosions abound but 
do little more than inconvenience the characters and 
eventually bore the audience with their repetition and 
dearth of meaningful stakes* Some D&D campaigns fall 
into the same trap, stringing world-spanning disasters 
together one after another with little impact on the 
characters or the world. Thus, it’s probably not in the 
DM's best interest to reorder the world every single time 
there's a lull in the action, lest world Prediction, omen, prophecy 

10 Myth and legend 

1-2. Rise or Fall of a Leader or an Era 

Eras are often defined by the prominent leaders, 
innovators, and tyrants of the day These people change 
the world and etch their signatures indelibly on the 
pages of history. When they rise to power, they shape 
the time and place where they live in monumental ways. 
When they fall from power or pass away, the ghost of 
their presence lingers. 

Determine the kind of leader that influences the new 
or passing era. You can choose the type of leader or 
determine one randomly using the Leader Types table. 

Leader Types 

dG Leader Type 

1 Political 

2 Religious 

3 Military 

4 Crime/underwodd 

5 Art/culture 

6 Phtlosophy/learning/magic 

Political leaders arc monarchs, nobles, and chiefs. 
Religious leaders include deities avatars, high priests 
and messiahs, as well as those in charge of monasteries 
and leaders of influential religious sects. Major military 
leaders control the armed forces of countries. They 
include military dictators, warlords, and the heads of 
a ruler s war council. Minor military leaders include 
the heads of local militias, gangs, and other martial 
organizations. At the broadest scale, a criminal or 
underworld leader wields power through a network of 
spies, bribes, and black-market trade. On the smallest 
scale, these are local gang bosses, pirate capon the world: 

* Name one thing that has been consistently true about 
the world, which is now no longer true due to this 
leader’s rise or influence. This is the biggest change 
that occurs when the new leader takes power and 
becomes the prevailing trail that defines the era, the 
characteristic for which it is remembered. 

* Name the person (or people) whose death, defeat, or 
loss opened the door for this leader to take power. 

This might be a military defeat, the overthrow of 
old ideas, a cultural rebirth, or something else. Who 
died, lost, or was defeated? What weren’t they willing 
to compromise? Was the new leader complicit in 

the death, defeat, or loss, or was the opportunity 
serendipitous? 

* Despite the leader s virtues, one flaw in particular 
outrages a certain segment of the populace. What 
is that flaw? What person or group of persons will 
do their utmost to foil this leader because of it? 
Conversely, what is this leader's greatest virtue, and 
who rises to the leader’s defense because of it? 

* Who believes in this leader now, but still retains 
doubts? This is someone dose to the leader, who has 
the leader’s trust and knows his or her secret fears, 
doubts, or vices. 

Fad of a Leader, End of an Era . All that begins must 
end. With the fall of kings and queens, the maps of the 
world are redrawn. Laws change, new customs become 
all the rage, and old ones fall out of favor. The attitude 
of the citizens toward their fallen leader shifts subtly at 
first and then changes dramatically as they look back or 
reminisce about the time before. 

The fallen leader might have been a benevolent 
ruler, an influential citizen, or even an adversary to the 
characters. How does the death of this person affect 
those formerly under his or her influence? Here are 
several things to consider when determining the effects 
of a leader’s passing; 

- Name one positive change that the leader brought to 
his or her domain or sphere of influence. Does that 
change persist after the leader’s death? 

* State the general mood or attitude of the people under 
this person’s power. What important fact didn't they 
realize about this person or his or her reign, which 
will later come to light? 

* Name one person or group that tries to fill the leader’s 
shoes in the resulting power vacuum, 

CHAPTER t I A WORLD Of YOUR OWN 


* Name one person or group that plotted against 
this leader. 

- Name three things for which this leader will be 
remembered. 

3, Cataclysmic Disaster 

Earthquake, famine, fire, plague, flood disasters on a 
grand scale can eradicate whole civilizations without 
warning. Natural (or magical) catastrophes redraw 
maps, destroy economies, and alter worlds. Sometimes 
the survivors rebuild from the ruins. Theion. 

Regardless of the scale, a world-shaking assault or 
invasion stands out because its repercussions change 
\ne characters’ world, and its effects echo long after the 
nitial attack or takeover. 

Imagine that part of your campaign world is attacked 
c r invaded. Depending on the current scale of your 
rampaign, the area might be as small as a section 
: a city or as large as a continent, world, or plane of 
existence. 

Define the aggressor and whether it represents a 
known enemy or a previously unknown adversary. 

Select a threat that already poses a danger to the area 
you’ve chosen, or use the Invading Forces table to 
determine the aggressor. 

Invading Forces 

d8 Invading Force 

1 A criminal enterprise 

2 Monsters or a unique monster 

3 A planar threat 

4 A past adversary reawakened, reborn, or resurgent 

5 A splinter faction 

6 A savage tribe 

7 A secret society 

8 A traitorous ally 



Now consider these other aspects of the conflict: 


• Name one element of the invasion or assault that the' 
defenders didn’t expect or couldn’t repel. 

• Something happened to the first defenders who stood 
against the invasion or assault—something no one 
wants to talk about. What was it? 

• The attackers or invaders had a motive for their 
action that wasn't obvious or understood at first. 

What was it? 

• Who turned traitor, and at what point diieve? How long is this 
achievement likely to last? 

* Stale the cost exacted upon the old order after its 
fall from power. Does anyone from the former power 
group remain in power during the next regime? If the 
old order remains in powder, describe one way that its 
leaders punish the revolutionaries. 

* One of the rebellion s prominent leaders—In some 
respects the face of the revolution—was driven by a 
personal reason for his or her part in events. Describe 
this person and state the true reason he or she led the 
rebellion, 

* What problem existed before the revolution that 
persists in spite of it? 


6, Extinction or Depletion 
Something that once existed in the campaign world 
is gone. The lost resource might be a precious metal, 
a species of plant or animal that held an important 
place in the local ecology, or an entire race or culture of 
people. Its absence causes a chain reaction that affects 
every creature that uses or relies on it. 

You can eliminate a people, place, or thing that 
previously existed in a certain location or area in your 
campaign world. On a small scale, the last of a family 
dynasty passes away or a once-thriving mining town 
in the region dries up and becomes a ghost town. On a 
grand scale, magic dies, the last dragon is slain, or the 
final fey noble departs the world. 

What is gone from the world—or the region of the 
world yarge 
and powerful organizations can exert enough influence 
to rule the world. Some new organizations benefit the 
populace, while others grow to threaten the civilization 
they once protected. 

Perhaps an important new organization arises in one 
part of your world. It could have humble or auspicious 
beginnings, but one thing is certain: it is destined to 
change the world as long as it progresses along its 
present course. Sometimes an organ ization's alignment 
is apparent from inception, but its morality can remain 
ambiguous until its doctrines, policies, and traditions 
are revealed over time. Choose the type of organization, 
or use the New Organizations table to generate ideas. 

New Organizatsons 

dlO New Organization 

1 Crime syndicate/bandit confederacy 

2 Guild (masons, apothecaries, goldsmiths) 

3 Magical circle/society 

4 Miiitary/knightly order 

5 New family dynasty/tribe/dan 

6 Philosophy/disdpline dedicated to a principle or ideal 

7 Realm (village, town, duchy, kingdom) 

S Religion/sect/denomination 

9 School/university 

10 Secret society/cult/cabal 

Then consider some or all of the following options: 

* The new order supplants a current power group in 
the world, gaining territory, converts, or defectors and 
reducing the previous power group s numbers. Who or 
what does the foundation of this new order supplant? 

* The new order appeals to ast fl avored for your campa ign. 

A discovery is particularly impressive when the 
adventurers in your campaign are the ones who 
make it. If they discover a new mineral with magical 
properties, map a new' land that’s eminently suitable 
for colonization, or uncover an ancient weapon w'ith 
the power to wreak devastation on your world, they 
are likely to set major events in motion. This gives 
the players the opportunity to see exactly how much 
influence their actions have oo your world. 

Decide on the type of discovery that is made or use 
the Discoveries table to generate ideas. 

Discoveries 

dlO Discovery 

1 Ancient rufn/lost city of a legendary race 

2 Animal/monster/magical mutation 

3 fnvention/technology/magic (helpful, destructive) 

4 New (or forgotten) god or planar entity 

5 New (or rediscovered) artifact or religious relic 

6 New land (island, continent, lost world, demiplane) 

7 Otherworldly object (planar portal, alien spacecraft) 

8 People (race, tribe, lost civilization, colony) 

9 Plant (miracle herb, fungal parasite, sentient plant) 

10 Resource or wealth (gold, gems, mithral) 

Once you have determined the type of discovery, flesh 
it out by deciding exactly what it is, who discovered 
it, and what potential effect it could have on the 
w'orld. Ideally, previous adventures in your campaign 
will help you fill in the blanks, but also keep thea big event on a grand scale, 
since it will take time to come true (or be averted). 

Imagine that a world-shaking prophecy comes to light. 
If events continue on their present course, the prophecy 
will come true and the world will change dramatically 
as a result. Don't shy away from making this prophecy 
both significant and alarming, keeping in mind the 
following points: 

- Create a prophecy that foretells a major change to 
the campaign world. You can build one from scratch 
using ideas from the current campaign or randomly 
determine a world-shaking even! and flesh out 

the details, 

* Write a list of three or more omens that w ill occur 
before the prophecy comes to pass. You can use 
events that have already occurred in the campaign so 
that the prophecy is closer to being fulfilled. The rest 
are events that might or might not happen, depending 
on the actions of the characters, 

* Describe the person or creature that discovered 
the prophecy and how it w : as found. What did this 
creature gain by revealing it? What did this person 
lose or sacrifice? 

- Describe the individual or faction that supports the 
prophecy and works to ensure its fulfillment, and the 
one that will do all in its power to avert the prophecy. 
What is the first step each takes? Who suffers for 
their efforts? 

* One part of the prophecy is WTong. Choose one of the 
omens you listed or ic horrors dwell. 

T racking Time _ 

A calendar lets you record the passage of time in the 
campaign. More importantly, it lets you plan ahead for 
the critical events that shake up the world. For simple 
time tracking, use a calendar for the current year in 
the real world. Pick a date to indicate the start of the 
campaign, and make note of the days that adventurers 
spend on their travels and various activities. The 
calendar tells you wTien the seasons change and 
the lunar cycle. More importantly, you can use your 
calendar to track important festivals and holidays, as 
well as key events that shape your campaign. 

This method is a good starting point, but the calendar 
of your world need not follow a modern calendar. If you 
want to customize your calendar with details unique to 
your world, consider these types of features. 

The Basics 

A fantasy world's calendar doesn't have to mirror the 
modern one. but it can (see “The Calendar of Harptos" 
sidebar for an example). Do the weeks of a month have 
names? What about specific days of each month, like the 
ides, nones, and calends of the Roman calendar? 

Physical Cycles 

Determine vvhen the seasons fall, marked by the 
solstices and equinoxes. Do the months correspond 
to the phases of the moon (or moons)? Do strange 
and magical effects occur at the same ti me as these 
phenomena? 

Religious Observances 

Sprinkring. The wealthiest citizens 
bring the largest animals, to haunt their wealth and 
iemonBtrate their piety* People pour out libations at the 
graves of their ancestors* They spend all-night vigils in 
darkened shrines or enjoy splendid feasts celebrating a 
j d's bounty. 

Civic Observances 

Holy days provide the majority of the special 
rclebrations in most calendars, but local or national 
festivals account for many others. The birthday of a 
monarch, the anniversary of a great victory in a war, 
raft festivals, market days, and similar events all 
rovide excuses for local celebrations. 

Fantastic Events 

Since your setting is a fantasy world and not a mundane 
medieval society, add in a few events of an obviously 
magical nature* For example* perhaps a ghostly castle i 
-ppears on a certain hill on the winter solstice every 
car* or every third full moon fills lycanthropes w ith a 
■ nicularly strong bloodlust. Also, the thirteenth night 
: every month could mark the ghostly wanderings of a 
mg- forgot ten nomadic tribe. 

Extraordinary events, such as the approach of a comet 
: r a lunar eclipse, make good adventure elements, and 
\ ou can drop them in your calendar wherever you want* 

; ur calendar can tell you when there's a full moon for 
3 lunar eclipse* but you can always fudge the date for a 
particular effect. 

Ending a Campaign __ 

■ campaign s ending shvided into 
three tendays. Five special holidays fall between the months 
and mark the seasons. Another special holiday, Shieldmeet, 
is inserted into the calendar after Midwinter every four years* 
much like leap years in the modern Gregorian calendar. 


Month 

Name 

Common Name 

I 

Hammer 

Deepwinter 


Annual holiday: Midwinter 


Quadrennial holiday: Shieldmeet 

2 

Alturiak 

The Claw of Winter 

3 

Ches 

The Claw of the Sunsets 

4 

Tarsakh 

The Claw of the Storms 


Annual holiday: Greengrass 

5 

Mirtul 

The Melting 

6 

Kythorn 

The Time of Flowers 

7 

Flamerule 

Summertide 


Annual holiday: Midsummer 

S 

Eleasias 

Highsun 

9 

Eleirrt 

The Fading 


Annual holiday: Highharvesttide 

10 

Marpenoth 

Leaffall 

11 

Uktar 

The Rotting 

Annual holiday: The Feast of the Moon 

12 

Nightal 

The Drawing Down 





CH 

A ITER 1 I A WORLD OF YOUR OWN 
















Play Style 

By building a new world (or adopting an existing one) 
and creating the key events that launch your campaign, 
you determined what your campaign is about. Next, you 
have to decide how you want to run your campaign. 
What's the right way to run a campaign? That depends 
on your play style and the motivations of your players. 
Consider your players’ tastes, your strengths as a 
DM table rules (discussed in part 3), and the type of 
game you want to run. Describe to the o Explore 

Much of a campaign involves the adventurers traveling from 
place to place, exploring the environment, and learning 
about the fantasy world. This exploration can take place in 
any environment, including a vast wilderness, a labyrinthine 
dungeon, the shadowy passages of the Underdark, the 
crowded streets of a city, and the undulating waters of 
the sea. Determining a way around an obstacle, finding a 
hidden object, investigating a strange feature of a dungeon, 
deciphering clues, solving puzzles, and bypassing or 
disabling traps can all be part of exploration. 

Sometimes exploration is an incidental part of the game. 
For instance, you might gloss over an unimportant journey 
by telling the players that they spend three uneventful days 
on the road before moving along to the next point of interest. 
Other times exploration is the focus, a chance to describe 
a wondrous part of the world or story that Increases the 
players 1 feeling of immersion. Similarly, you should consider 
playing up exploration if your players enjoy solving puzzles, 
finding their way around obstacles, and searching dungeon 
corridors for secret doors. 


only after both the characters and the lords have come 
to terms with their differing outlooks and agendas. 

Th is style of gaming is deep, complex, and challenging. 
The focus isn’t on combat but on negotiations, political 
maneuver a dungeon setting, you can present NPCs that aren't 
meant to be fought but rather helped out, negotiated 
with, or just talked to. 

Think about your preferred style of play by 
considering these questions: 

* Are you a fan of realism and gritty consequences, or 
are you more focused on making the game seem like 
an action movie? 

* Do you want the game to maintain a sense of medieval 
fantasy, or do you want to explore alternate time lines 
or modern thinking? 

* Do you want to maintain a serious tone, or is humor 
your goal? 

* Even if you are serious, is the action lighthearted 
or intense? 

* Is bold action key, or do the players need to be 
thoughtful and cautious? 

* Do you like to plan thoroughly in advance, or do you 
prefer improvising on the spot? 

* Is the game full of varied D&D elements, or does it 
center on a theme such as horror? 

* Is the game for all ages, or does it involve 
mature themes? 

* Are you comfortable with moral ambiguity such as 
allowing the characters to explore whether the end 
justifies the means? Or are you happier with straight¬ 
forward heroic principles, such as justice, sacrifice, 
and helping the downtrodden? 


CHAPTER 1 j A WORLD OF YOUR OWN 





















1 ■ 






















Character Names 

Part of vour campaign style has to do with naming 
characters. Its a good idea to establish some ground 
rules with  one adventure matter in the 
next. Plotting and running that kind of campaign can 
be demanding on the DM, but the payoff is a great and 
memorable story. 

An episodic campaign, in contrast, is like a television 
show- where each week’s episode is a self-contained 
story that doesn’t play into any overarching plot. It 
might be built on a premise that explains its nature: the 
player characters are adventurers-for-hi re, or explorers 
venturing into the unknown and facing a string of 
unrelated dangers. They might even be archaeologists, 
venturing into one ancient ruin after another in search 
of artifacts. An episodic game like this lets you create 
adventures—or buy published ones—and drop them into 
your campaign without worrying about how they fit with 
the adventures that came before and follow after. 

Cam paign Them e _ 

A theme in a campaign, as in a work of literature, 
expresses the deeper meaning of a story and the 
fundamental elements of human experience that the 
story explores. Your campaign doesn't have to be a work 
of literature, but it can still draw on common themes 
that lend a distinctive flavor to its stories. Consider 
these examples: 


* A campaign about confronting the inevitability of 
mortality, w hether embodied in undead monsters or 
expressed through the death of loved ones. 

* A campaign revolving around an insidious evil, 
whether leplaving. your 
players might enjoy the occasional dungeon crawl- 
especial ly if the tangent is revealed to relate to a larger 
plot in the campaign. If most of your adventures are 
dungeon expeditions, shift gears with a tense urban 
mystery that eventually leads the party into a dungeon 
crawl in an abandoned building or tower. If you run 
horror adventures week after week, try using a villain 
who turns out to be ordinary, perhaps even silly. Comic 
relief is a great variation on almost any D&D campaign, 
though players usually provide it themselves. 

Tiers of Play 

As characters grow in power, their ability to change the 
world around them grows with them, ft helps to think 
ahead when creating your campaign to account for this 
change. As the characters make a greater impact on the 
world, they face greater danger whether they want to 
or not. Powerful factions see them as a threat and plot 
against them, while friendly ones court their favor in 
hopes of striking a useful alliance. 

The tiers of play represent the ideal milestones for 
introducing new world-shaking events to the campaign. 
As the characters resolve one event, a new danger 
arises or the prior trouble transforms into a new threat 
in response to the characters' actions. Events need to 
grow in magnitude and scope, increasing the stakes and 
drama as the characters become increasingly powerful. 


chap, 
giant spiders, evil cultists, bloodthirsty ghouls, and 
hired thugs. If they face even a young dragon, they're 
better off avoiding a fight. 

Levels 5-10: Heroes of the Realm 

By the time they reach this tier, adventurers have 
mastered the basics of their class features, though they 
continue to improve throughout these levels. They have 
found their place in the world and have begun to involve 
themselves in the dangers that surround them. 

Dedicated spellcasters learn 3rd-level spells at the 
start of this tier. Suddenly characters can fly, damage 
large numbers of foes with fireball and lightning bolt 
spells, and even breathe underwater. They master 
5th-level spells by the end of the tier, and spells such 
as teleportation circle, scrying, flame strike, legend 
lore, and raise dead can have a significant impact on 
their adventures. They start acquiring more permanent 
magic items (uncommon and rare ones) as well, which 
will serve them for the rest of their careers. 

The fate of a region might depend on the adventures 
that characters of levels 5 to 10 undertake. These 
adventurers venture into fearsome wilds and ancient 
ruins, where they confront savage giants, ferocious 
hydras, fearless golems, evil yuan-ti. scheming devils, 
bloodthirsty demons, crafty mind flayers, and drow 
assassins. They might have a chance of defeating a 
young dragon that has established a lair but not yet 
extended its reach far into the surrounding territory. 


Levels 11-16: Masters of the 
Realm 

By 11th level, characters are shining examples of 
courage and determination—true paragons in the world, 
set well apart from the masses. At this tier, adventurers 
are far more versatile than they were at lower levels, and 
they can usually find the right tool for a given challenge. 

Dedicated spellcasters gain access to 6th-level spells 
at 11th level, including spells that completely change 
the way adventurers interact with the world. Their big, 
flashy spells are significant in combat— disintegrate, 
blade barrier, and heal, for example—but behind-the- 
scenes spells such as word of recall, find the path, 
contingency, teleport, and true seeing alter the way 
players approach their adventures. Each spell level after 
that point introduces new effects with an equally large 
impact. The adventurers find rare magic items (and very 
rare ones) that bestow similarly powerful abilities. 

The fate of a nation or even the world depends on 
momentous quests that such characters undertake. 
Adventurers explore uncharted regions and delve into 
long-forgotten dungeons, where they confront terrible 
masterminds of the lower planes, cunning rakshasas 
and beholders, and hungry purple worms. They might 
encounter and even defeat a powerful adult dragon 
that has where they 
fight savage balor demons, titans, archdevils, lich 
archmages, and even avatars of the gods themselves. 
The dragons they encounter are wyrms of tremendous 
power, whose sleep troubles kingdoms and whose 
waking threatens existence itself. 


CHAPTER 1 I A WORLD OF YOUR OWN 













Characters who reach 20th level have attained 
the pinnacle of mortal achievement. Their deeds are 
recorded in the annals of history and recounted by 
bards for centuries. Their ultimate destinies come to 
pass. A cleric might be taken up into the heavens to 
serve as a god’s right hand. A warlock could become 
a patron to other warlocks. Perhaps a wizard unlocks 
the secret to immortality (or undeath) and spends eons 
exploring the farthest reaches of the multi verse. A druid 
might become one with the land, transforming into a 
nature spi rit of a particular place or an aspect of the 
wild. Other characters could found clans or dynasties 
that revere the memory of their honored ancestors 
from generation to generation, create masterpieces of 
epic literature that are sung and retold for thousands 
of years, or establish guilds or orders that keep the 
adventurers’ principles and dreams alive. 

Reaching this point doesn't necessarily dictate the 
end of the campaign. These powerful characters might 
be called on to undertake grand adventures on the 
cosmic stage. And as a reoks by 
Robert E. Howard and Fritz Leiber? Your choice can 
have a impact on the favor of your campaign. 

Heroic Fantasy 

Heroic fantasy is the baseline assumed by the D&D 
rules. The Player s Handbook describes this baseline: 
a multitude of humanoid races coexist with humans in 
fantastic worlds. Adventurers bring magical powers to 
bear against the monstrous threats they face. These 
characters typically come from ordinary backgrounds, 
but something impels them into an adventuring life. The 
adventurers are the -'heroes" of the campaign, but they 
might not be truly heroic, instead pursuing this life for 
selfish reasons. Technology and society are based on 
medieval norms, though the culture isn't necessarily 
European, Campaigns often revolve around delving into 
ancient dungeons in search of treasure or in an effort to 

destroy monsters or villains. 

¥ 

This genre is also common in fantasy fiction. Most 
novels set in the Forgotten Realms are best described as 
heroic fantasy, following in the footsteps of many of the 
authors listed in appendix E of the Player s Handbook. 

Sword and Sorcery_ 

A grim, hulking fighter disembowels the high priest 
of the serpent god on his own altar. A laughing rogue 
spends ill-gotten gains on cheap wine in filthy taverns. 
Hardy adventurers venture into the unexplored jungle in 
search of the fabled City of Golden Masks. 

A sworruistic virtue. Fighter rogue, and 
: srbarian characters tend to be far more common than 
wizards, clerics, or paladins, in such a pulp fantasy 
—■.ting, those who wield magic often symbolize the 
ir cade nee and corruption of civilization, and wizards 
ire the classic villains of these settings. Magic items are 
.- refore rare and often dangerous. 

. main Dungeons & Dragons novels follow in the 
•steps of classic sword-and-sorcery novels. The world 
Athas (as featured in numerous Dark Sun novels and 
game products), with its heroic gladiators and tyrannical 
- rcerer-kings, belongs squarely in this genre. 


cpic Fantasy 


\ devout paladin in gleaming plate armor braces her 
lance as she charges a dragon. Bidding farewell to his 
at love, a noble wizard sets forth on a quest to close 
Ihe gate to the Nine Hells that has opened in the remote 
wilderness, A close-knit band of loyal friends strives to 
rcome the forces oi a tyrannical overlord, 

\n epic-fantasy campaign emphasizes the conflict 

- tween good and evil as a prominent element 
the game, with the adventurers more or less 

- qua rely on the side of good. These characters 
are heroes in the best sense, driven by a higher 
purpose than selfish gain or ambition, and facing 

edible dangers without blinking. Characters 
it ght struggle with moral quandaries, fighting 
: evil tendencies within themselves as well as 

evil that threatens the world. And the stories of 
:ese campaigns often include an element of romance: 
tragic affairs between star-crossed lovers, passion that 
'unscends even death, and chaste adoration between 
jevout knights and the monarchsand nobles they serve. 

The novels of the Dragonlance saga exemplify the 
Ira dilion of epic fantasy in D&D. 


Mythic Fantasy 


V, de an angry god tries time and again to destroy him, 
i lever rogue makes the long journey home from war. 

- rwing the terrifying guardians of the underworld, a 

r hie warrior ventures into the darkness to retrieve the 
>: ui of her lost love. Calling on their divine parentage, 
a group of demigods undertake twelve labors to win the 
a blessings for other mortals, 

\ mythic-fantasy campaign draws on the themes and 

- ries of ancient myth and legend, from Gilgamesh 

. -i Chulainn. Adventurers attempt mighty feats of 
gend, aided or hindered by the gods or their agents— 
nd they might have divine blood themselves. The 
Asters and villains they face probably have a similar® 
pin. The minotaur in the dungeon isn't just another 
beaded humanoid, but the Minotaur—misbegotten 
“Apring of a philandering god. Adventures might lead 
r heroes through a series of trials to the realms of the 

- js in search of a gift or favor, 

Such a campaign can draw on the myths and legends 
any culture, not justinfiltrate the city before the 
invasion. At the embassy balk the spy in the royal court 
makes contact with his employer. 

Political intrigue, espionage, sabotage, and similar 
cloak-and-dagger activities can provide the basis for 
an exciting D&D campaign. In this kind of game, the 
characters might care more about skill training and 
making contacts than about attack spells and magic 
weapons. Roleplaying and social interaction take on 
greater importance than combat, and the party might go 
for several sessions without seeing a monster. 

Again, make sure your players know ahead of time 
that you want to run this kind of campaign. Otherwise, 
a player might create a defense-focused dwarf paladin, 
only to find he is out of place among half-elf diplomats 
and tiefling spies. 

The Brimstone Angels novels by Erin M. Evans focus 
on intrigue in the Forgotten Realms setting, from the 
backstabbsng politics of the Nine Hells to the contested 
succession of Cor my re an royalty. 


Who stole three legendary magic weapons and hid them 
away in a remote dungeon, leaving a cryptic clue to their 
location? Who placed the duke into a magical slumber, 
and what can be done to awaken him? Who murdered 
the guildmaster, and how did the killer get into the 
guild's locked vault? 

A mystery-themed campaign puts the characters in 
the role of investigators, perhaps traveling from town 
to town to crack tough cases the local authorities can t 
handle. Such a campaign emphasizes puzzles and 
problem-solving in addition to combat prowess, 

A larger mystery might even set the stage for the 
whole campaign. Why did someone kill the characters’ 
mentor, setting them on the path of adventure? Who 
really controls the Cult of the Red Hand? In this case, 
the characters might uncover clues to the greater 
mystery only once in a while; individual adventures 
might be at best tangentially related to that theme, A 
diet of nothing but puzzles can become frustrating, so 
be sure to mix up the kinds of encounters you present. 

Novels in various D&D settings have explored the 
mystery genre with a fantasy twist. In particular. Murder 
in Cormyr (by Chet Williamson). Murder in Halruaa (by 
Richard S, Meyers), and SpeUstonn (by Ed Greenwood) 
are mysteries set in the 1 Forgotten Realms. Murder 
in Tarsis (by John Maddox Roberts) takes the same 
approach in the Dragon lance setting. 

Swashbuckling 

Rapier-wielding sailors fight off boarding sahuagin. 
Ghouls lurk in derelict ships, waiting to devour treasure 
hunters. Dashing rogues and charming paladins weave 
their way through palace intrigues and leap from 
balconies onto waiting horses below. 

The swashbuckling adventures of pirates and 
musketeers suggest opportunities for a dynamic 
campaign. The characters typicallm:: c ements arrive, killing enemy scouts before 

can report, or cutting off supply lines. Information 
ring and diplomatic missions can supplement the 
BD' j - combat-oriented adventures, 

1 - W ar of the Lance in the Dragonlance Chronicles 
:; s and the War of the Spider Queen in the novel 
5 rd - d" the same name are prominent examples of 

- 5 rs in D&D novels, 

Wuxi a 

•ten a sensei disappears mysteriously, her young 
3 E 3 is must take her place and hunt down the oni 
terrorizing their village. Accomplished heroes, masters 
rftrrir respective martial arts, return home to free their 
_ c- from an evil hobgoblin warlord. The rakshasa 
r c- ^ of a nearby monastery performs rituals to raise 
tec bled ghosts from their rest, 

- ampaign that draws on elements of Asian martial- 
w' - movies is a perfect match for D&D. Players can 
ferir the appearance of their characters and gear 

wo* : r they like for the campaign, and spells need only 
-n=r> r flavor changes so that they better reflect such a 

- For example, when the characters use spells 
«r special abilities that teleport them short distances. 

. nually make high-flying acrobatic leaps. Ability 
mu -is to climb don’t involve careful searching for holds 
bn - characters bounce up walls or from tree to tree. 

j : rs stun their opponents by striking pressure 
peir-is Flavorful descriptions of actions in the game 
tice, found its way 
to the Victoria and Albert Museum in London in 1985, 
Somewhere in the Barrier Peaks of Oerth, the wreckage 
of a spacefaring vessel is said to lie, w ith bizarre alien 
Hfeforms and strange items of technology on board. And 
the famous wizard Elminster of the Forgotten Realms 
has been said to make occasional appearances in the 
kitchen of Canadian writer Ed Greenwood—where he is 
sometimes joined by wizards from the worlds of Gerth 
and Krynn (homeworkl of the Dragonlance saga). 

Deep in D&D’s roots are elements of science 
fiction and science fantasy, and your campaign might 
draw on those sources as well. It’s okay to send your 
characters hurtling through a magic mirror to Lewis 
Carroll s Wonderland, put them aboard a ship traveling 
between the stars, or set your campaign in a far-future 
world where laser blasters and magic missiles exist 
side by side. The possibilities are limitless. Chapter 
9, “Dungeon Master's Workshop," provides tools for 
exploring those possibilities. 


Wuxia Weapon Names 


Weapon 

Battleaxe 

Club 

Dagger 

Dart 

Flail 

CJaive 

Greatctub 

Greats word 

Halberd 

Handaxe 

Javelin 

Lance 

Longbow 

Longsword 

Mace 

Pike 

Quarterstaff 

Scimitar 

Shortbow 

Shortsword 

Sickle 

Spear 

Trident 

War pick 


Other Names (Culture) 

fu (China); masakari (Japan) 

bian (China); tonfa (Japan) 

bishou , tamo (China); kozuka P tanto (Japan) 

sburiken (Japan) 

mnehaku (Japan) 

guandao (China); bisento, naginata (Japan) 
tetsuho (Japan) 

changdao (China); nodachs (Japan) 
ji (China); kamayari (japan) 
ono (Japan) 

man (China); uchi-ne (Japan) 

umayari (Japan) 

daikyu (Japan) 

jicm (China); katana (Japan) 

chut (China); karnbo (Japan) 

mao (China); nagaeyan (japan) 

gun (China); bo (Japan) 

liuyedao (China); wakizashi (japan) 

hankyu (Japan) 

shuangdao (China) 

kama (Japan) 

qiang (China); yan (japan) 

cha (China); magariyari (japan) 

fang (China); kuwa (Japan) 


jf YOUR u 


ri \ 


WK 


CHAPTER 1 


V W O R L E 








































Chapter 2: Creating a Multiverse 



HEN ADVENTURERS REACH HIGHER LEVELS, 
their path extends to other dimensions of 
reality; the planes of existence that form the 
multiverse. The characters might be called 
on to rescue a friend from the horrific depths 
of the Abyss or to sail the shining waters of 
the River Ocean us. They can hoist a tankard 
he friendly giants of Ysgard or face the chaos of 
bo to contact a wizened githzerai sage. 

7 anes of existence define the extremes of strange 
■sc rfeen dangerous environments. The most bizarre 
■aliens present settings undreamed of in the natural 
- : Planar adventures offer unprecedented dangers 
nders. Adventurers walk on streets made of solid 
- test their mettle on a battlefield where the fallen 
i~- - n rrected with each dawn. 


_ he Planes 


TV various planes of existence are realms of myth 
^ ; mystery. They're not simply other worlds, but 
r ensions formed and governed by spiritual and 
s-mental principles. 

The Outer Planes are realms of spirituality and 
Jit. They are the spheres where celestials, fiends, 
j Odes exist. The plane of Elysium, for example, 
isc merely a place where good creatures dwell, and not 
r simply the place where spirits of good creatures 
when they die. It is the plane of goodness, a spiritual 
reai where evil can t flourish. It is as much a state of 
tesng and of mind as it is a physical location. 

inner Planes exemplify the physical essence 
i - : elemental nature of air, earth, fire, and water. 

TV Elemental Plane of Fire, for example, embodies 

V essence of fire. The plane's entire substance is 
Vsed with the fundamental nature of fire: energy, 
ssiom transformation, and destruction. Even objects 
- lid brass or basalt seem to dance with flame, in a 

?le and palpable manifestation of the vibrancy of 
- dominion. 

mis context, the Material Plane is the nexus where 
hese philosophical and elemental forces collide in 
tumbled existence of mortal life and matter. The 
* of D&D exist within the Material Plane, making 

: starting point for most campaigns and adventures. 
The rest of the multiverst include any or all of 
the previous three 

* The place where mortal spirits go after death, which 
might include any or all of the first three 

* A way of getting from one plane to another 

* A way for spells and monsters that use the Astra l 
Plane and the Ethereal Plane to function 

Once you've decided on the planes you want to use in 
your campaign, putting them into a coherent cosmology 
is an optional step. Since the primary way of traveling 
from plane to plane, even using the Transitive Planes, 
is through magical portals that link planes together, the 
exact relationship of different planes to one another is 
largely a theoretical concern. No being in the multiverse 
can look down and see the planes in their arrangement 
the same wav as we look at a diagram in a book. No 
mortal can verify whether Mount Celestia is sandwiched 
between Bytopia and Arcadia, but it’s a convenient 
theoretical construct based on the philosophical 
shading among the three planes and the relative 
importance they give to law and good. 

Sages have constructed a few such theoretical models 
to make sense of the jumble of planes, particularly the 
Outer Planes. The three most common are the Great 

Inventing Your Own Planes 

Each of the planes described in this chapter has at least 
one significant effect on travelers who venture there. When 
you design your own planes, rt r s a good ithe 
World Tree VggdrasiL The three roots of the World 
Tree touch the three realms: Asgard (an Outer Plane 
that includes Valhalla, Vanaheim, Alfheim, and other 
regions), Midgard (the Material Plane), and Niflheim 
(the underworld). The Bifrost, the rainbow bridge, 
is a unique transitive plane that connects Asgard 
and Midgard. 

Similarly, one vision of the planes where the deities 
of the Forgotten Realms reside situates a number of 
celestial planes in the branches of a World Tree, while 
the fiendish planes are linked by a River of Blood. 
Neutral planes stand apart from them. Each of these 
planes is primarily the domain of one or more deities, 
though they are also the homes of celestial and fiendish 
creatures. 

The World Axis 

In this view of the cosmos, the Material Plane and its 
echoes stand between two opposing realms. The Astral 
Plane (or Astral Sea) floats above them, holding any 
number of divine domains (the Outer Planes). Below 
the Material Plane is the Elemental Chaos, a single, 
undifferentiated elemental plane where all the elements 
clash together. At the bottom of the Elemental Chaos is 
the Abyss, like a hole torn in the fabric of the cosmos. 

Other Visions 

As you build your own cosmology, consider the 
following alternatives. 

The Omniverse, This simple cosmology covers the 
bare minimum: a Material Plane; the Transitive Planes: 
a single Elemyptian cosmology is defined by 
the daily path of the sun—across the sky of the Material 
Plane, down to the fair Offering Fields in the west, 
where the souls of the righteous live in eternal reward, 
and then beneath the world through the nightmarish 
Twelve Hours of Night. The Solar Barge is a tiny Outer 
Plane in its own right, though it exists within the Astral 
Plane and the other Outer Planes in the different stages 
of its journey. 

One World , In this model, there are no other 
planes of existence, but the Material Plane includes 
places like the bottomless Abyss, the shining Mount 
Celestia, the strange city of Mechanus. the fortress of 
Acheron, and so on. All the planes are locations in the 
w^orId t reachable by ordinary means of travel—though 
extraordinary effort is required, for example, to sail 
across the sea to the blessed isles of Elysium. 

The Otherworld * In this model, the Material Plane 
has a twin realm that fills the role of all the other planes. 
Much like the Fey wild, it overlays the Material Plane 
and can be reached through “thin places" where the 
worlds are particularly close: through caves, by sailing 
far across the sea T or in fairy rings in remote forests. It 
has dark, evil regions (homes of fiends and evil gods), 
sacred isles (homes of celestials and the spirits of the 
blessed death), and realms of elemental fury. This 
otherworly interplanar 
c section that links a specific location on one plane 
Id a specific location on another. Some portals function 
b- • doorways, appearing as a clear window or a fog- 
m rcuded passage, and interplanar travel is as simple 

- stepping through the doorway. Other portals are 

ations—circles of standing stones, soaring towers, 
ng ships, or even whole towns—that exist in 
m pie planes at once or flicker from one plane to 
peother. Some are vortices, joining an Elemental Plane 
mnih a very similar location on the Material Plane, such 

- - heart of a volcano (leading to the Plane of Fire) or 

- icptlis of the ocean (to the Plane of Water). 

- -sing through a planar portal can be the simplest 
~ tc travel from the Material Plane to a desired 
location on another plane. Most of the time, though, a 
postal presents an adventure in itself. 

F rsi. the adventurers must find a portal that leads 

* they want to go. Most portals exist in distant 
■ >ns r and a portal's location often has thematic 

si T: • rities to the plane it leads to. For example, a portal 
~ : heavenly mountain of Celestia might be located 
mountain peak. 

:ond, portals often have guardians charged with 

* airing that undesirable people don't pass through. 
Depending on the portal s destination, “ undesirable 

:* ' might include evil characters, good characters, 

a rds. thieves, anyon and remain open for a 
short time. 

Key. The portal functions if the traveler is holding a 
particular object: the item acts much like a key to 
a door. This key item can be a common object or a 
particular key created for that portal. The city of Sigil 
above the Outlands is known as the City of Doors 
because it features an overwhelming number of such 
item-keyed portals. 

Learning and meeting a portal's requirements can 
draw characters into further adventures as they chase 
down a key item, scour old libraries for command 
words, or consult sages to find the right time 
to visit the portal. 











circle, but such knowledge is even harder to come 
by than ihe specifications of the required tuning 
fork. Otherwise, the spell transports the caster to 
a location in the general vicinity of the desired spot. 
Wherever the adventurers arrive, they'll most likely 
still need to undertake a journey to reach the object or a 
planar quest. 

Gate* The gate spell opens a portal linked to a specific 
point on another plane of existence. The spelt provides 
a shortcut to a planar destination, bypassing many of 
the guardians and trials that would normally fill such 
a journey. But this 9th-level spell is out of reach for all 
but the most powerful characters, and it does nothing t 
negate any obstacles that wait at the destination. 

The gate spell is powerful, but not infalliroject themselves 
into the Astral Plane and from there travel to the 
Outer Planes. 

Plane Shift The plane shift spell has two important 
limitations. The first is the material component: a 
small, forked, metal rod (like a tuning fork) attuned to 
the desired planar destination. The spell requires the 
proper resonating frequency to home in on the correct 
location, and the fork must be made of the right material 
(sometimes a complex alloy) to focus the spell's magic 
properly. Crafting the fork is expensive (at least 250 gp). 
but even the act of researching he correct specifications 
can lead to adventure. After all, not many people 
voluntarily travel into the depths of Carceri, so very few 
know what kind of tuning fc rk is required to get there. 

Second, the spell doesn't send the caster to a specific 
location unless he or she has specialized information. 
The sigil sequence of a teleportation circle located on 
another plane allows the caste: tc travel directly to that 


Hdfsstra opened her eyes and found herself drifting in 
an endless silver sea. Soft gray clouds moved slowly in 
the distance, while strange dark streaks twisted violently 
through the sky , anchored m ends so distant she couldnt 
perceive them, their middle parts revolving angrily like 
pieces of string rolled between a child's fingertips. She 
glanced down, wondering what supported her, and saw 
 the 
rare portals that leads directly there) has no silver cord. 


Color Pools 


Gateways leading from the Astral Plane to other 
planes appear as two-dimensional pools of rippling 
dors, ld6 x 10 feet in diameter. Traveling to another 
plane requires locating a color pool that leads to the 
r sired plane. These gateways to other planes can be 
. zentified by color, as shown on the Astral Color Pools 
able. Finding the right color pool is a matter of chance: 
rating the correct one takes Id4 * 10 hours of travel. 


Astral Color Pools 


d20 

Plane 

Pool Color 

1 

Ysgard 

Indigo 

2 

Limbo 

Jet black 

3 

Pandemonium 

Magenta 

4 

The Abyss 

Amethyst 

5 

Career! 

Olive 

6 

Hades 

Rust 

7 

Gehenna 

Russet 

3 

The Nine Hells 

Ruby 

9 

Acheron 

Flame red 

10 

Mechanus 

Diamond blue 

n 

Arcadia 

Saffron 

12 

Mount Celestia 

Gold 

13 

Bytopia 

Amber 

14 

Elysium 

Orange 

15 

The Beastlands 

Emerald green 

16 

Arborea 

Sapphire blue 

17 

The Gutlands 

Leather brown 

IS 

Ethereal Plane 

Spiraling white 

19-20 

Material Plane 

Silver 


Psychic Wind 


A psychic wind isn't a physical wind like that found on 
the Material Plane, but a storm of thought that batters 
travelers’ minds rather than their bodies. A psychic 
wind is made up oflost memories, forgotten ideas, 
minor musings* and subconscious fears that went 
astray in peared to be only gray shadows. Rwalen 
and Brennus stood beside him. 

“The ethereal plane." Rivcilen said . “77ie dragons breath 
cannot affect us hereT 


d20 Mental Effect 


—Paul $. Kemp. Shadowstorn: 



1-8 Stunned for 1 minute; you can repeat the saving 
throw at the end of each of your turns to end the 
effect on yourself 

9-10 Short-term madness (see chapter 8) 

11-12 11 (2dl0) psychic damage 

13-16 22 (4dl0) psychic damage 

17-18 Long-term madness (see chapter 8) 

19-20 Unconscious for 5 (1 d 10) minutes; the effect on 
you ends if you take damage or if another creature 
uses an action to shake you awake 


Astral Plane Encounters 


Planar travelers and refugees from other planes wander 
the expanses of the Astral Plane. The most prominent 
denizens of the Astral Plane are the githyanki, an 
outcast race of reavers that sail sleek astral ships, 
slaughter astral travelers* and raid planes touched 
by the Astral. Their city. Tu’narath, floats through the 
Astral Plane on a chunk of rock that is actually the body 
of a dead god. 

Celestials, fiends, and mortal explorers often scour 
the Astral Plane for color pools leading to desired 
destinations. Characters who linger for too long 
in the Astral might have an encounter with one or 
more wandering angels, demons, devils, night hags, 
yugoloths, or other planar travelers. 


The Ethereal Plane is a mist and 
solid objects on the overlapped plane don’t hamper 
the movement of a creature in the Border Ethereal, 

The exceptions are certain magical effects (including 
anything made of magical force) and living beings. This 
makes the Ethereal Plane ideal for reconnaissance, 
spying on opponents, and moving around without beino 
detected. The Ethereal Plane also disobeys the laws 
of gravity; a creature there can move up and down as 
easily as walking. 

Deep Ethereal _ 

To reach the Deep Ethereal, one needs a plane shift 
spell or arrive by means of a gate spell or magical porta 
Visitors to the Deep Ethereal are engulfed by roiling 
mist. Scattered throughout the plane are curtains of 
vaporous color, and passing through a curtain leads a 
traveler to a region of the Border Ethereal connected to 
a specific Inner Plane, the Material Plane, the Fey wild, 
or the ShadowfelL The color of the curtain indicates the 
plane whose Border Ethereal the curtain conceals; sec 
the Ethereal Curtains table. 



















Ethereal Curtains 

dS Plane Color of Curtain 

1 Material Plane Bright turquoise 

2 Shadowfelf Dusky gray 

3 Feywild Opalescent white 

4 Plane of Air Pale blue 

5 Plane of Earth Reddish-brown 

6 Plane of Fire Orange 

7 P [ a n e of Wate r G ree n 

S Elemental Chaos Swirling mix of colors 

Traveling through the Deep Ethereal to journey from 
one plane to anoel 
time is doubled. Less often, a group is blown into the 
Border Ethereal of a random plane. Rarely, the cyclone 
ars a hole in the fabric of the plane and hurls the party 
into the Astral Plane. 

Ethereal Pla ne Encount ers _ 

Most encounters in the Border Ethereal are with 
features on the Material Plane w T hose senses or 
abilities extend into the Ethereal Plane (phase spiders, 

- example)* Ghosts also move freely between the 
Ethereal and Material Planes* 

In the Deep Ethereal, most encounters are with other 
travelers* particularly ones from the Inner Planes (such 
i? elementals, genies. and salamanders), as well as the 
rasional celestial* fiend, or fey. 


Feywild 

Stepping into the portal was like settling into a warm bath, 
though the chill didn't fade from the air. At first everything 
muted—the roar of the river around fhe rocks below, the 
chirping of frogs and crickets on shore , the evening bustle of 
the town behind him .... A moment Inter, the world erupted 
into vibrant life. Frogs and night birds sang a chorus: the air 
was awash with outumn scents: the moon 1 ight painted the 
flowers in iridescent blue, silver, and violet: and the rushing 
of the river became a complex symphony. 

—James Wyatt, Oath of Vigilance 

The Feywild, also called the Plane of Faerie, is a land of 
soft lights and wonder, a place of music and death. It is a 
realm of everdarker 
regions of the plane are home to such malevolent 
creatures as hags* blights, goblins* ogres* and giants. 


Seelie and Unseelie Fey 

Two queens hold court in the Feywild, and most fey owe 
allegiance to one or the other. Queen Titania and her 
Summer Court lead the seelie fey, and the Queen of Air and 
Darkness, ruler of the Gloaming Court, leads the unseelie fey, 
Seelie and unseelie do not directly correlate with good and 
evil, though many mortals make that equation. Many seelie 
fey are good, and many unseelie are evil, but their opposition 
to each other stems from their queens' jealous rivalry, not 
abstract moral concerns. Ugly denizens of the Feywild, such 
as fomortans and hags, are almost never members of either 
court, and fey of independent spirit reject the courts entirely. 
The courts have warred at times, but they also compete in 
more-or-less friendly contests and even ally with one another 
in small and secret ways. 

■ ■ 


C H A PI Efi 2 I C R EAT IN G A M U LTIV E R 3 E 












5T~ 




Fey crossings are places of mystery anti beauty on the 
Material Plane that have a near-perfect mirror in the 
Fey wild, creating a portal where the two planes touch, 

A traveler passes through a fey crossing by entering a 
clearing, wading into a pool stepping into a circle of 
mushrooms, or crawling under the trunk of a tree. To 
the Iraveler, it seems lcessful save, the 
creature's memories remain intact but are a little hazy. 
Any spell that can end a curse can restore the creature’s 
lost memories. 


Time Warp 

While time seems to pass normally in the Feywild, 
characters might spend a day there and realize, upon 
leaving the plane, that less or more time has elapsed 
everywhere else in the multi verse. 

Whenever a creature or group of creatures leaves 
the Feywild after spending at least 1 day on that plane, 
you can choose a time change that works best for your 
campaign, if any or roll on the Feywild Time Warp 
table. A wish spell can be used to remove the effect on 
up to ten creatures. Some powerful fey have the ability 
to grant such wishes and might do so if the beneficiaries 
agree to subject themselves to a geas spell and complete 
a quest after the wish spell is cast. 


Feywild Time Warp 


d20 

Result 

d20 

Result 

1-2 

Days become 

14-17 

Days become weeks 


minutes 

18-19 

Days become 

3-6 

Days become hours 


months 

7-13 

No change 

20 

Days become years 


Fey Crossings 



CHAPTER ( 1 ! CREATING A MULTI VERSE 




















Shadowfell 

Riven stood in the uppermost room of the central tower of 
his citadel—a fortress of shadows and dark stone carved in 

relief into the sheer face of a jagged peak _ The starless 

black vault of the plane's sky hung over a landscape of gray 
srs similar to the Material Plane. 
Landmarks from the Material Plane are recognizable 
>n the Shadowfell, but they are twisted and warped- 
distorted reflections of what exists on the Material 




Similar to fey crossings, shadow crossings are locations 
where the veil between the Material Plane and the 
Shadowfell is so thin that creatures can walk from one 
plane to the other. A blot of shadow in the corner of a 
dusty crypt might be a shadow crossing, as might an 
open grave. Shadow crossings form in gloomy places 
where spirits or the stench of death lingers, such as 
battlefields, graveyards, and tombs. They manifest only 
in darkness, closing as soon as they feel light’s kiss. 


Domains of Dread 


In remote corners of the Shadowfell. it is easy to reach 
horrific demiplanes ruled over by accursed beings of 
terrible evil. The best known of these is the valley of 
Barovia, overlooked by the towering spires of Castle 
Ravenloft and ruled by Count Strahd von Zarovich, 
the first vampire. Beings of the Shadowfell called the 
Dark Powers created these domains as prisons for 












these 'darklords/' and through cruelty or carelessness 
trapped innocent mortals in these domains as well. 

Optional Rule: 

Shadowfell Despair _ 

A melancholic atmosphere pervades the Shadowfell 
Extended forays to this plane can afflict characters with 
despair, as reflected in this opes despair, as does any 
spell or other magical effect that removes a curse. 


Evernight 

The city of Neverwinter in the world of the Forgotten Realms 
has a dark reflection on the Shadowfell: the city of Evernight. 
Evernight is a city of cracked stone edifices and homes of 
rotten wood. Its roads are made mostly of trampled grave 
dust, and its few cobbled streets are missing enough stones 
that they appear pockmarked. The sky is corpse gray, and the 
breeze blows cold and humid* bringing a chill to the skin. 

The city’s living residents include mad necromancers, 
corrupt purveyors of human flesh, worshipers of evil deities, 
and others who are able to make themselves useful and crazy 
enough to want to live here. But the living are a minority 
in Evernight, for the bulk of the population consists of the 
shambling dead. Zombies, wights, vampires, and other 
undead make the city their home, all under the watchful eyes 
of the ruling caste: intelligent flesh-eating ghouls. 

Rumors abound that this foul place mirrors one city on 
every world. 


Inner Planes 

He was lying on his back upon baked and smoldering stone, 
staring up at a smoky gray sky lit from distant and unseen 
fires. Around him , a sea of lava burped gouts of gas and jets 
offlame. The Elemental Plane office. 

Thank the fell ones. Vhok thought . / never thought id be 
so happy to be here . 

—Thomas M. water, and unsullied air. Any 
foreign substance is extremely rare: little air can be 
found in the outermost reaches of the Plane of Earth, 
and earth is all but impossible to find in the outermost 
reaches of the Plane of Fire. These areas are much less 
hospitable to travelers from the Material Plane than 
the border regions are. Such regions are little know n, 
so when discussing the Plane of Fire, for example, a 
speaker usually means the border region. 

The outermost regions are largely the domains of 
elemental spirits barely recognizable as creatures. 

The creatures usually called elemental® dwell here, 
including the Elemental Princes of Evil (primordial 
beings of pure elemental fury) and elemental spirits 
that spellcasters can bind into galeb duhrs, golems, 
invisible stalkers, magmin. and water weirds. These 
elemental creatures don't need food or other sustenance 
on their home planes, because they are sustained by the 
elemental energies that saturate those planes. 

El emental Ch aos _ 

At the farthest extents of the Elemental Planes, the pure 
elements dissolve and bleed together into an unending 


C H APT Eg. 2 | C R fc A‘ HNG A M U LT! V £ V. $ £ 


















^hiuft of dashing energies and colliding substance 
i ed the Elemental Chaos. Elementals can be found 
as well but they usually don't stay long, preferring 
cifort of their native planes.s to howling gales 
\n rip a creature apart. Even the most skilled 
_ features must navigate these currents carefully, 

_ with the winds, not against them. 

Here and there among the Labyrinth Winds are 
n: den realms reachable only by following a particular 
s- nee of flowing winds, and thus largely protected 
sc nst attackers. One such realm is fabled Aaqa. a 
aiming domain of silver spires and verdant gardens 
jboc 2 fertile earth mote. The Wind Dukes of Aaqa are 
§r z ited to law and good, and they maintain a vigilant 

- 2 against the depredations of elemental evil and the 

' ichment of the Elemental Chaos. They are served 
to makocra and a lit tie-known race called the vaati. 

7 he region of the Plane of Air nearest the Great 
T;r dagration is called the Sirocco Straits. Hot. dry 
sr > scour the earth motes in this area to dry and 
jhrren chunks of rock. Gargoyles and their allies from 
Plane of Earth gather here to launch raids into the 
pm of Aaqa. 

E ---tween the Sea of Fire (on the Plane of Fire) and 
Sirocco Straits is a towering firestorm called the 
Great Conflagration, sometimes called the Plane of 
Ash. Howling winds from the Plane of Air mix with the 
drier storms and lava of the Plane of Fire to create an 
- -less storm front—a wall of flames, smoke, and ash, 

7 - - thick ash obscures sight beyond a few dozen feet, 
and the battering winds make travel d slender 
gemstone-inlaid spires that top most buildings. The city 
is protected by a powerful spell that alerts the entire dao 
population if a visitor steals even a single stone. Theft is 
punishable by death, with punishment extending to the 
thief's relatives. 

The mountains nearest the Fountains of Creation (on 
the Plane of Fire) are called the Furnaces. Lava seeps 
through their caverns, and the air reeks of sulfur. The 
dao have great forges and smelting furnaces here to 
process their ores and shape their precious metals. 

The border region between the planes of Water and 
Earth is a horrid swamp where twisted, gnarled trees 
and thick, stinging vines grow from the dense muck and 
slime. Here and there within the Swamp of Oblivion 
(also called the Plane of Ooze), stagnant lakes and pools 
play host to thickets of weeds and monstrous swarms of 
mosquitoes. The few settlements here consist of wooden 
structures suspended above the muck. Most are built on 
platforms between trees, but a few stand on stilts driven 
deep into the muck. No solid earth underlies the mud 
of the swamp, so houses built on poles eventually sink 
down into it. 

It is said that any object cast into the Swamp of 
Oblivion can t be found again for at least a century. Now 
and then, a desperate soul casts an artifact of power into 
this place, removing it from the multi verse for a time. 
The prot 
1: jstery and rises to hurricane force during the 
orst storms. 

The heat in the Plane of Fire is comparable to 
t hot desert on the Material Plane, and poses a 
similar threat to travelers (see ' Extreme Heat" in 
• bapter 5, “Adventure Environments' 1 ). The deeper 
nc- goes into the plane, the rarer water becomes. 
Beyond a point, the plane holds no sources of water, 

- travelers must carry their own supplies or produce 
water by magic. 

The Plane of Fire is dominated by the vast Cinder 
Wastes, a great expanse of black cinders and embers 
< -ossed by rivers of lava. Roving bands of salamanders 
r.tle each other, raid azer outposts, and avoid the 
e:ree!. Ancient ruins dot the desert—remnants of 
rgotten civilizations, 

A great range of volcanic mountains called the 
Fountains of Creation is home to azers. These rocky 
: eaks curl from the edge of the Plane of Earth around 
:he Cinder Wastes toward the fiery heart of the plane. 
At the edge of the plane, the mountains are also called 
e Plane of Magma. Fire giants and red dragons 
: ake their homes here, as well as creatures from the 
neighboring planes. 

Lava flows through the volcanoes toward the Plane 
Air and pools into a great lava sea, called the Sea 
of Fire, sailed by efreet and azers in great brass ships. 
LA tnds of obsidian and basalt jut up from the sea. 

: .tied with ancient ruins and the lairs ofiven 
time, it can erode all in its path, 

A warm sun arcs across the sky of the Plane of 
Water, seeming to rise and set from within the water 
at the visible edge of the horizon. Several times a day* 
however, the sky clouds over and releases a deluge 
of rain, often accompanied by spectacular shows of 
lightning, before clearing up again. At night* a glittering 
array of stars and auroras bedecks the sky* 

The Plane of Water is an endless sea, called the Sea 
of Worlds, dotted here and there with atolls and islands 
that rise up from enormous coral reefs that seem to 
stretch forever into the depths* The storms that move 
across the sea sometimes create temporary portals 
to the Material Plane and draw ships into the Plane 
of Water. Surviving vessels from countless worlds 
and navies ply these waters with little hope of ever 
returning home* 

The weather on the plane is a lesson in extremes* 
if the sea isn't calm, it is battered bv storms. On rare 
occasions, a tremor in the planar firmament sends a 
rogue wave sweeping across the plane* swamping entire 
islands and driving ships down to the reefs. 

Life flourishes in the upper reaches of the Sea of 
Worlds* called the Sea of Light because of the sunlight 
filtering down into the water. Aquatic humanoids craft 
castles and fortresses in the coral reefs. The marids 
are the distant stewards of this region, content to ale Material Plane on the 
-land's shore. 

The region of the Plane of Water nearest the Swamp 
Oblivion (on the Plane of Earth) is called the Silt 
Flats. The water is thick with soil and sludge, and turns 
into muddy ground before giving way to the great swamp 
between the planes* 

At the other extreme of the plane is the Sea of Ice, 
ordering the Frost fell The frigid water is choked with 
bergs and sheet ice. inhabited by the cold-loving 
reatures that inhabit the Frostfell. Drifting icebergs 
an carry these creatures farther into the Plane of 
Water to threaten ships and islands in warmer seas. 

The Frostfell. also called the Plane of Ice, forms the 
border between the planes of Air and Water and is a 
' emingly endless glacier sw^ept by constant, raging 
jzzards. Frozen caverns twist through the Plane of 
e, home to yetis, remorhazes, white dragons, and other 
creatures of cold. The inhabitants of the plane engage in 
~ never-ending battle to prove their strength and ensure 
:heir survival. 

Its dangerous monsters and bitter cold make the 
Frostfell a dangerous place to travel. Most planar 
voyagers keep to the air, braving the powerful winds and 
ifiving snow to avoid setting foot on the great glacier. 


Outer Planes 

Streamers of noxious gas streaked that crimson dome like 
dirty clouds. They whirled to form what looked like giant 
eyes staring down, eyes that were stially, many of the Outer Planes appear 
hospitable and familiar to natives of the Material Plane. 
But the landscape can change at a whim of the powerful 
forces that dwell on these planes, which can remake 
them completely, effectively erasing and rebuilding 
existence to better fulfill their divine needs. 

Distance is a virtually meaningless concept on the 
Outer Planes. The perceptible regions of the planes can 
seem quite small, but they can also stretch on to what 
seems like infinity. Adventurers could take a guided 
tour of the Nine Hells, from the first layer to the ninth, 
in a single day—if the powers of the Hells desire it. Or if 
could take weeks for travelers to make a grueling trek 
across a single layer. 

The default Outer Planes are a group of sixteen planes 
that correspond to the eight alignments (excluding 
neutrality, which is represented by the Outlands, 
described in the section on 'Other Planes' ) and the 
shades of distinction between them. 

The Outer Planes 


Outer Plane 

Alignment 

Mount Celestia, the Seven Heavens of 

LG 

Bytopia, the Twin Paradises of 

MG, LG 

Elysium, the Blessed Fields of 

MG 

The Beastlands, the Wilderness of 

MG, CG 

Arborea, the Olympian Glades of 

CG 

Ysgard, the Heroic Domains of 

CM, CG 

Limbo, the Ever-Changing Chaos of 

CN 

Pandemonium, the Windswept Depths of 

CN, CE 

The Abyss, the Infinite Layers, the Nine Hells has nine layers, and the Abyss has 
a seemingly endless number of layers. 

Most portals from elsew here reach the fi rst layer of a 
multilayered plane. This layer is variously depicted as 
the top or bottom layer, depending on the plane. As the 
arrival point for most visitors, the first layer functions 
like a city gate for that plane. 

Travelin g the O ut er Planes 

Traveling between the Outer Planes isn't dissimilar 
from reaching the Outer Planes in the first place. 
Characters traveling by means of the astral projection 
spell can go from one plane into the Astral Plane, and 
there search out a color pool leading to the desired 
destination. Characters can also use plane shift to reach 
a different plane more directly. Most often, though, 
characters use portals—either a portal that links the tw 
planes directly or a portal leading to Sigil, City of Door> 
which holds portals to all the planes. 

Two planar features connect multiple Outer Planes 
together: the River Styx and the Infinite Staircase. 

Other planar crossings might exist in your campaign, 
such as a World Tree whose roots touch the Lower 
Planes and whose branches reach to the Upper Planes, 
or it might be possible to walk from one plane to a not lie r 
in your cosmology. 

The River Styx 

This river bubbles with grease, foul flotsam, and 
the putrid remains of battles along its banks. . J 


£»_ ^*4 

I; H*f. 

» i-- -n 









- g< 'ing from simple stairs of wood or stone to a 


jmble of stairs hanging in radiant space* where 
steps share the same gravitational orientation* 
i i that one can find one’s heart's desire on 

_-Staircase through diligent searching of 

landing. 

Deers the Infinite Staircase are often tucked 
- -rsty, half-forgotten places that no one 
~ ?t pays any attention to. On any given plane, 

. ;-r be multiple doors to the Infinite Staircase* 
it entrances aren’t common knowledge and are 
ci - rally guarded by devas, sphinxes, yugoloths, and 
werful monsters. 

tional Rules 


the Outer Planes has peculiar characteristics 
r _ke traveling through it a unique experience. A 
e 5 influence can affect visitors in various ways, such 
_ them to take on personality traits or flaws 
reject the disposition of the plane, or even shift 
n: to more closely match the native inhabitants 
: lane. Each plane's description includes one or 
m n lional rules that you can use to help make the 
j^e-surers’ experiences on that plane memorable. 

:nal Rule: Psychic Dissonance 

pi H c-f the Outer Planes emanates a psychic 
haso -nee that affects visitors of an incompatible 
p^rtm-good creatures on the Lower Planes, evil 
-- :he Upper Planes—if they spend too much 
the plane. You can reflect this dissonance with 
: . nal rule. At the end of a l two layers of the Twin Paradises of Bytopia are 
similar yet opposite: one is a tamed, pastoral landscape 
and the other an untamed wilderness, yet both reflect 
the plane's goodness and its acceptance of law and 
order when necessary* Bytopia is the heaven of 
productive work, the satisfaction of a job well done* The 
goodness flowing through the plane creates feelings of 
goodwill and happiness in creatures dwelling there. 

Optional Rule: Pervasive Goodwill 
At the end of each long rest taken on this plane, a 
visitor that is neither lawful good nor neutral good 


CHAPTER 2 | CREATING A M Ul.TjVERSE 


59 




































must make a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw. On a failed 
save, the creature's alignment changes to lawful good 
or neutral good (whichever is closer to the creature's 
current alignment). The change becomes permanent 
if the creature doesn't leave the plane within ld4 days. 
Otherwise, the creature s alignment reverts to normal 
after one day spent on a plane other than Bytopia. 
Casting the dispel evil and good spell on the creature 
also restores its original alignment. 


and wildflowers wave in the wind with vibrant life. The 
plane embodies nature's wildness and beauty, but it alse 
speaks to the animal within all living tilings. 


Optional Rule: Hunter's Paradise 

Visitors to the Beastlands find their hunting and 
stalking capabilitever a visitor slays a beast native to the plane, the 
slayer must succeed on a DC 10 Charisma saving throw 
or become transformed (as the polymorph spell) into the 
type of beast that was slain. In this form, the creature 
retains its intelligence and ability to speak. At the end of 
each long rest, the polynaorphed creature can repeal tht 
saving throw. On a successful saving throw, the creature 
returns to its true form. After three failed saving throws, 
the transformation can be undone only by a remove 
curse spell or similar magic. 

Arb orea _ 

Larger than life, Arborea is a place of violent moods 
and deep affections, of whim backed by steel, and of 
passions that blaze brightly until they burn out. Its 
good-natured inhabitants are dedicated to fighting evil, 
but their reckless emotions sometimes break free with 
devastating consequences. Rage is as common and as 
honored as joy in Arborea, There the mountains and 
forests are extravagantly massive and beautiful, and 
every glade and stream is inhabited by nature spirits 
that brook no infringement. Travelers must tread lightly. 

Arborea is home to many elves and elven deities, Elve^ 
born on this plane have the celestial type and are wild at 
heart, ready to battle evil in a heartbeat. Otherwise, they 
look and behave like normal elves. 


jSo 


CHAFTE\R 2 ! CKfci A l ING A M V LTfVTRSE 



















. ption: iitions and afflictions it suffered before its death 
are removed, 

Limbo 


L ~bo is a plane of pure chaos, a roiling soup of 
— rrrmanent matter and energy. Stone melts into 
paler that freezes into metal, then turns into diamond 


that burns up into smoke that becomes snow, and 
on and on in an endless, unpredictable process of 
change. Fragments of more ordinary landscapes - bits 
of forest, meadow, ruined castles, and even burbling 
streams—drift through the disorder. The whole plane is 
a nightmarish riot. 

Limbo has no gravity, so creatures visiting the plane 
float in place. A creature can move up to its walking 
speed in any direction by merely thinking of the desired 
direction of travel. 

Limbo conforms to the will of the creatures inhabiting 
it. Very disciplined and powerful minds can create 
whole islands of their own invention within the plane, 
sometimes maintaining those places for years. A 
simpleminded creature such as a fish, though, might 
have less than a minute before the pocket of water 
surrounding it freezes, vanishes, or turns to glass. 

The slaadi live here and swim amid this chaos, 
creating nothing, whereas githzerai monks build entire 
monasteries with their minds. 


Optional Rule: Power of the Mind 

As an action, a creature on Limbo can make an 
Intelligence check to mentally move an object on 
the plane that it can see within 30 fee It also makes conversation possible only 
hv yelling, and even then only to a maximum distance 
of 10 feet. Creatures have disadvantage on any ability 
check that relies on hearing. 

Most of the plane’s inhabitants are creatures that were 
banished to the plane with no hope of escape, and many 
of them have been driven mad by the incessant winds 
or forced to take shelter in places where the winds die 
down until they sound like distant cries of torment. 

Optional Rule: Mad Winds 
A visitor must make a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw 
after each hour spent among the howling winds. On a 
failed save, the creature gains one level of exhaustion. 

A creature that reaches six levels of exhaustion while 
on this plane doesn't die. Instead, the creature gains 
a random form of indefinite madness, as described in 
chapter 8, “Running the Game/' Finishing a long rest 
doesn’t reduce a creature s exhaustion level unless the 
creature can somehow escape the maddening winds. 

The Abyss _ 

The Abyss embodies all that is perverse, gruesome, and 
chaotic. Its virtually endless layers spiral downward into 
ever more appalling forms. 

Each layer of the Abyss boasts its own horrific 
environment. Although no two layers are alike, they are 
all harsh and inhospitable. Each layer also reflects the 
entropic nature of the Abyss. In fact, much of what one 
sees or touches on the plane seems tilar magic. Whenever the possessed 
character rolls a 1 on an attack roll, ability check, 
or saving throw, the demon takes control of the 
character and determines the character’s behavior. 
At the end of each of the possessed character's 
turns, he or she can make a DC 15 Charisma saving 
throw. On a success, the character regains control 
until he or she rolls another 1, 

Important Layers 

The layers of the Abyss are defi ned by the demon lords 
who rule them, as the following examples illustrate. 
More information about the demon lords can be found in 
the Mons ter Ma n ua 1. 

The Gaping Maw . Demogorgon s layer in the Abyss 
is a vast wilderness of savagery and madness know n 
as the Gaping Maw, where even powerful demons 
go insane with fear. Reflecting Demogorgon’s dual 
nature, the Gaping Maw consists of a massive primeval 
continent covered in dense jungle, surrounded by a 
seemingly endless expanse of ocean and brine fiats. The 
Prince of Demons rules bis layer from two serpentine 
towers, which emerge from a turbid sea. Each tower 
is topped with an enormous fanged skull. The spires 
constitute the fortress of Abysm, where few creatures 
can venture without descending into madness. 

Thanatos . If Ore us had his way, all planes would 
resemble his dead realm of Thanatos, and all creatures 
would become undead under his control. Under its 
black sky, Thanatos i and which outrank 
mightier demons while in the Spider Queen's realm. 

The Endless Maze* Bap hornet's layer of the Abyss is 
a never-ending dungeon, the center of which holds the 
Horned King's enormous ziggurat palace. A confusing 
jumble of crooked hallways and myriad chambers, the 
palace is surrounded by a mile-wide moat concealing 
a maddening series of submerged stairs and tunnels 
leading deeper into the fortress. 

The Triple Realm* The Dark Prince Graz’zt rules 
over the realm of Azzagrat, which encompasses three 
layers of the Abyss. His seat of power is the fantastic 
Argent Palace in the city of Zelatar, whose bustling 
markets and pleasure palaces draw visitors from across 
the multiverse in search of obscure magical lore and 
t erverse delights. By Graz’zt s command, the demons 
Azzagrat present a veneer of civility and courtly 
mity, However, the so-called Triple Realm holds as 
much danger as any other part of the Abyss, and planar 
* i-iiors can vanish without a trace in its mazelike cities 
1 in forests whose trees have serpents for branches. 
Death Dells* Yeenoghu rules a layer of ravines known 
s Death Dells. Here, creatures must hunt to survive. 
Even the plants, which must bathe their roots in blood, 

- are the unwary. Yeenoghu s servants, helping to sate 
ir master s hunger as he prowls his kingdom seeking 
prey, capture creatures from the Materialthe creature gains one level of exhaustion, which 
can t be removed while the creature remains in Hades. 

If the creature reaches six levels of exhaustion* it doesn't 
die. Instead, the creature permanently transforms into 
a larva, whereupon all levels of exhaustion afflicting the 
creature are removed. 

A larva is a miserable fiend that retains the facial 
features of its previous form but has the body of a fat 
worm. A larva has only a few faint memories of its 
previous life and the statistics in the larva stat block. 

Hades is crawling with larvae. Night hags, liches, and 
rakshasas harvest them for use in vile rituals. Other 
fiends like to feed on them. 


Larva 

Medium fiend r neutral evil 


Armor Class 9 

Hit Points 9 (2dS) 

Speed 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS 

CHA 

9 (-1) 9 (-1) 10 (+0) 6 (-2) 10 (+0) 

2<-4) 

Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages understands the languages it knew in life but 
can't speak 

1 Challenge 0 (ID XP) 

Actions | 

B/te, Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
Hit; 1 (ld4 - 1) piercing damage. 

target. 

Gehenna 



Gehenna is the plane of suspicion and greed. It is the 
birthplace of the yugoloths, which dwell here in great 
numbers. A volcanic mountain dominates each of the 
four layers of Gehenna, and lesser volcanic earthbergs 
drift in the air and smash into the greater mountains. 

The rocky slopes of the planee to 
be vanquished, the victor would rule the plane in turn. 
Such is the law of the Nine Hells, 

Optional Rule: Pervasive Evil 
Evil pervades the Nine Hells, and visitors to this plane 
feel its influence. At the end of each long rest taken on 
this plane, a visitor that isn't evil must make a DC 10 
Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature's 
alignment changes to lawful evil. The change becomes 
permanent if the creature doesn't leave the plane within 
ld4 days. Otherwise, the creature s alignment reverts 
to normal after one day spent on a plane other than the 
Nine Hells, Casting the dispel evil and good spell on the 
creature also restores its original alignment. 

The Nine Layers 

The Nine Hells has nine layers. The First eight are 
each ruled by archdevils that answer to Asmodeus, 
the Archduke of Nessus, the ninth layer. To reach the 
deepest layer of the Nine Hells, one must descend 
through all eight of the layers above it. in order. The 
most expeditious means of doing so is the River Styx, 
which plunges ever deeper as it flows from one layer 
to the next. Only the most courageous adventurers can 
withstand the torment and horror of that journey. 

Avernus* No planar portals connect directly to the 
lower layers of the Nine Hells, by Asmodeuss orders. 

As such, the first layer of Avernus is the arrival point 
for visitors to the plane. Avernus is a ro current lord. 
Dispater. A manipulator and deceiver, the archduke is 
devilishly handsome, bearing only small horns, a tail, 
and a cloven left hoof to distinguish him from a human. 
His crimson throne stands in the heart of the Iron City 
of Dis, a hideous metropolis that is the largest in the 
Nine Hells. Planar travelers come here to conspire with 
devils and to close deals with night hags, rakshasas, 
incubi, succubi, and other fiends, Dispater collects a 
piece of every deal through special provisions that are 
added to contracts signed on his layer of the Nine Hells. 

Dispater is one of Asmodeus s most loyal and 
resourceful vassals, and few beings in the multiverse 
can outwit him. He is more obsessed than most devils 
with striking deals with mortals in exchange for their 
souls, and his emissaries work tirelessly to foster evil 
schemes in the Material Plane. 

Minauros , The third layer of the Nine Hells is a 
stench-ridden bog. Acidic rain spills from the layer's 
brown skies, thick layers of scum cover its putrid 
surface, and yawning pits lie in wait beneath the murk to 
engulf careless wanderers. Cyclopean cities of ornately 
carved stone rise up from the bog. including the great 
city of Minauros for which the layer is named. 

The slimy walls of the city rise hundreds of feet into 
the air. protecting the flooded halls of Mammon. The 
Archduke of Minauros reseghtning. 

Archduke Levisms once betrayed Asmodeus and is 
now encased deep in the ice of Stygia as punishment. 

He rules this layer ah rhe same, communicating 
telepath ica I ly with his I lowers and servants, both in 
the Nine Hells and n the Material Plane. 























Stygia is also home to its previous ruler, the 
serpentine archdevil Geryon, who was dismissed 
by Asmodeus to allow the imprisoned Levistus 
to regain his rule. Geryon's fall from grace has 
spurred much debate within the infernal courts. No 
one is certain whether Asmodeus had some secret 
cause to dismiss the archdevil or whether he is testing 
j cry on's allegiance for some greater purpose. 

Malbolge. Malbolge, the sixth layer, has outlasted 
many rulers, among them Malagard the Hag Countess 
and the archdevil Moloch. Malagard fell out of favor and 
a as struck down by Asmodeus in a fit of pique, while 
her predecessor, Moloch, still lingers somewhere on 
the sixth layer as an imp, plotting to regain Asmodeus's 
favor. Malbolge is a seemingly endless slope, like the 
sides of an impossibly huge mountain. Parts of the 
layer break off from time to time, creating deadly and 
deafening avalanches of stone. The inhabitants of 
Malbolge live in crumbling fortresses and great caves 
carved into the mountainside, 

Malbolge s current archduchess is Asmodeuss 
daughter, Glasya. She resembles a succubsh from 
bone. Cities embedded in the ice provide shelter for 
quests and prisoners of Cania’s ruler, the brilliant and 
conniving archdevil Mephistopheles. 

Mephistopheles dwells in the ice citadel of Mephistar, 
where he plots to seize the Throne of Baator and 
conquer the planes. He is Asmodeus’s greatest enemy 
and ally, and the Archduke of Nessus appears to 
trust Mephistophelcs's counsel when it is offered. 
Mephistopheles knows he can't depose Asmodeus until 
his adversary makes a grave miscalculation, and so 
both wait to see what circumstances might turn them 










u - * 




Ui 


* " 




- r*. 


r - alMfir 





























against each other Mephistopheles is also a godfather of 
sorts to Glasya, further complicating the relationship, 

Mephistopheles is a tall, striking devil with impressive 
horns and a cool demeanor. He trades in souls, as do 
other archdevils, but he rarely gives his time to any 
creatures not worthy of his personal attention. His 
instincts are as razor sharp as Cania's frigid winds, 
and it is said that only Asm ode us has ever deceived or 
thwarted him, 

Nessus < The lowest layer of the Nine Hells, Nessus is 
a realm of dark pits whose walls are set with fortresses. 
There, pit hend generals loyal to Asmodeus garrison 
their diabol ical legions and plot the conquest of the 
multiverse. At the center of the layer standharming other creatures 
by imbuing that creature with the strength to keep 
fighting. While on Acheron, a creature gains temporary 
hit points equal to half its hit point maximum whenever 
it reduces a hostile creature to 0 hit points. 


Mechanus 

On Mechanus. law is reflected in a realm of clockwork 
gears, all interlocked and turning according to their 
measure. The cogs seem to be engaged in a calculation 
so vast that no deity can fathom its purpose. Mechanus 
embodies absolute order, and its influence can be felt on 
those who spend time here. 

Modrons are the primary inhabitants of Mechanus. 
The plane is also home to the creator of the modrons: a 
godlike being called Primus. 

Optional Rule: Law of Averages 

While on Mechanus, creatures always use the average 
damage result for attacks and spells. For example, an 
attack that normally deals Id 10 + 5 damage always 
deals 10 damage on Mechanus. 

Optional Rule: Imposing Order 

At the end of each long rest taken on this plane, a visitor 
that isn't lawful neutral must make a DC 10 Wisdom 
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature s alignment 
changes to lawful neutral. The creature s alignment 
reverts to normal after one day spent on a plane other 
than Mechanus. Casting the dispel evil and good spell 
on the creature also restores its original alignment 

Arcadia _ 

Arcadia thrives with orchards of perfectly l and Sigil _ 

he Outlands is the plane between the Outer Planes. 

It is the plane of neutrality, incorporating a little of 
everything and keeping all aspects in a paradoxical 
balance—simultaneously concordant and in opposition. 
The plane has varied terrain, with prairies, mountains, 
and shallow rivers. 

The Outlands is circular, like a great disk. In fact, 
hose who envision the Outer Planes as a wheel point 
t he Outlands as proof, calling it a microcosm of the 
planes. That argument might be circular, since the 
arrangement of the Outlands inspired the idea of the 
’ real; Wheel in the first place. 

Around the outside edge of the circle, evenly spaced, 
are the gate-towns: sixteen settlements, each built 
around a portal leading to one of the Outer Planes. Each 
town shares many of the characteristics of the plane 


where its gate leads. Planar emissaries often meet in 
these towns, so it isn’t unusual to see strange pairings, 
such as a celestial and a fiend arguing in a tavern while 
sharing a fine bottle of wine. 

Given the fact that you can ride a horse in the 
Outlands from a heaven to a hell, a planar-themed 
campaign can be set there without the need for planar 
travel. The Outlands is the closest the Outer Planes 
come to being like a world on the Material Plane. 

Gate-Towns of the Outlands 


Town 

Gate Destination 

Excelsior 

The Seven Heavens ofe. Goods, merchandise, and 
information come here from across the planes. The city 
sustains a brisk trade in information about the planes, 
particularly the command words or items required for 
the operation of particular portals. Portal keys of all 
kinds are bought and sold here. 

The city is the domain of the inscrutable Lady of Pain, 
a being as old as gods and with purposes unknown to 
even the sages of her city. Es Sigil her prison? Is she the 
fallen creator of the multi verse? No one knows. Or if 
they do, they aren't telling. 

Demiplanes 

Demiplanes are extradimensional spaces that come 
into being by a variety of means and boast their own 
physical laws. Some are created by spells. Others exist 
naturally, as folds of reality pinched off from the rest 
of the multi verse. Theoretically, a plane shift spell can 
carry travelers to a demiplane. but the proper frequency 
required for the tuning fork would be extremely hard to 
acquire. The gate spell is more reliable, assuming the 
caster knows of the demiplane, 

A demiplane can be as small as a single chamber or 
large enough to contain an entire realm. For example* 
a Maidenkainen's magnificent mansion spell creates a 
demiplane consisting of a foyer with multiple adjoining 
rooms, while the land of Barovia (in the Ravenloft 
setting) exists entirely wdthin a demiplane under the 
sway of its vampire lord, Strahd vis 
long forgotten. Lost portals might still exist, marked by 
an alien magic that mutates the area around them* 

Known Worlds of the 
Material Plane 

Worlds of the Material Plane are infinitely diverse. The 
most widely known worlds are the ones that have been 
published as official campaign settings for the D&D 
game over the years. If your campaign takes place on 
one of these worlds, that world belongs to you in your 
campaign* Your version of the world can diverge wildly 
from what’s in print* 

On Toril (the heroic-fantasy world of the Forgotten 
Realms setting), fantastic cities and kingdoms stand 
amid the remains of ancient empires and realms 
long forgotten. The world is vast, its dungeons rich 
with history. Beyond the central continent of Facrun. 
Toril includes the regions of AI-Qadim. Kara-Tur, 
and Maztica, 

On Oerth (the sword-and-sorcery world of the 
Grey hawk setting), heroes such as Bigby and 
Mordenkainen are driven by greed or ambition. The 
hub of the region called the Flanaess is the Free City of 
Grey hawk, a city of scoundrels and archmagi, rife with 
adventure. An evil demigod, luz. rules a nightmarish 
realm in the north* threatening all civilization. 

On Krynn (the epic-fantasy world of the Dragon lance 
setting), the return of the gods is overshadowed by the 
rise of the evil dragon queen Takhisis and her dragons 
and dragon armies, which pl




Vi 



L 



tk ^ 


* ’ 



5fc^ 


1 >aji 

ft / i 


u 1 

u 1 

M 

fc|»1 

1 vl n ' 






L _ (J 

f 

rH 


t 







V 




























sags 


■‘•Ll&FJi 



r f v * u 
4 \\H 

B i 


r 



\ a .’f 


;*L + _ '9r 

> * ■ 


[ ^ 

\Jjfl 



n! *sn 

m- '. tJp 



























Chapter 3: Creating Adventures 


REATING ADVENTURES IS ONE OF THE GREATEST 

rewards of being a Dungeon Master. It's a 
way to express yourself, designing fantastic 
locations and encounters with monsters, 
traps, puzzles, and conflicts. When you 
design an adventure, you call the shots. You 
:o things exactly the way you want to. 

Fundamentally, adventures are stories. An adventure 
5 hares many of the features of a novel, a movie, an 
osue of a comic, or an episode of a TV show. Comic 
-cries and serialized TV dramas are particularly good 
iinparisons, because of the way individual adventures 
- limited in scope but blend together to create a larger 
narrative. If an adventure is a single issue or episode, a 
ampaign is the series as a whole. 

Whether you're creating your own adventures or using 
ublished adventures, you’ll find advice in this chapter 
help you create a fun and memorable experience for 
our players. 

Creating an adventure involves blending scenes of 
\ploration, social interaction, and combat into a unified 
whole that meets the needs, it r s likely to 
appeal to all types of players. 

An adventure you create for your home campaign 
doesn't have to appeal to every abstract player type- 
only to the players sitting down at your own table. If you 
don’t have any players who like fighting above all else* 
then don't feel you have to provide a maximum amount 
of combat to keep the adventure moving. 

Surprises 

Look for opportunities to surprise and delight your 
players. For example, the exploration of a ruined castle 
on a hill might lead to the discovery of a dragon’s tomb 
hidden underneath, A trek through the wilderness 
might lead to the discovery of a tower that appears only 
on nights of the full moon. Players remember such 
locations. 

Too many surprises can be off-putting to players, but 
adding the occasional twist gets players to adjust their 
tactics and think creatively. For example, you could 
spruce up a goblin lair by including goblin sappers 
with kegs of oil strapped to their backs. An attack on a 
villain’s estate might be complicated by the unexpected 
arrival of a special guest. 

When preparing for possible combat encounters, 
think about odd pairings of monsters, such as a 
hobgoblin warlord and bis pet manticore, or will- 
o’-wisps in league with a young black dragon. Have 
surprise reinforcements show up. or give the monsters 
unusual tactics. Throw in the occasional red her Set. 

You can make adjustments to a published adventure 
so that it better suits your campaign and appeals to 
your players. For example, you can replace the villain 
of an adventure with one the players have already 
encountered in your campaign, or add something to 
the background of the adventure so that it involves your 
players" characters in ways that the adventure’s designer 
never cou Id have ima gi ned. 

A published adventure can't account lor every 
action the characters might take. The nice thing 
about published adventures is that they allow you to 
focus your game preparation time on highlighting plot 
developments in your campaign that the adventure 
can’t address. 

Published adventures also provide inspiration. You 
might not use an adventure as written, but it might spur 
ideas, or you can pul! out one part of it and repurpose 
that part for your needs, for example, you might use a 
map of a temple but re populate it with monsters of your 
choice, or you might use a chase sequence as a model 
for a pursuit scene in your campaign. 

Adventure Structure 

Like every story, a typical adventure has a beginning, a 
middle, and an end. 

Beginning _ 

An adventure starts with a book to get the players 
interested, A good adventure hook piques the interest 
of the players and provides a compelling reason for 
their characters to become involved in the adventureront problems directly, perhaps by 
trying to kill meddlers. 

Remember that the characters are the heroes of the 
story. Never let them become mere spectators, watching 
as events unfold around them that they can't influence. 

Ending _ 

The ending encompasses the climax the scene or 
encounter in which the tension building throughout the 
adventure reaches its peak. A strong climax should have 
the players on edge, with the fate of the characters and 
much more hanging in the balance. The outcome, which 
hinges on the characters’ actions and decisions, should 
never be a forgone conclusion. 

An ending needn’t tie everything up in a neat bow. 
Story threads can be left hanging, waiting to be resolved 
in a later adventure, A little bit of unfinished business is 
an easy way to transition from one adventure to the next. 

Adventure Types 

An adventure can be location-based or event-based, as 
discussed in the sections that follow. 

Location-Based Adventures 

Adventures set in crumbling dungeons and remote 
wilderness locations are the cornerstone of countless 
campaigns. Many of the greatest D&D adventures of all 
time are location-based. 

Creating a location-based adventure can be broken 
down into a number of steps. Each step provides tables 
from which you can select the basic elements of your 
adventure. Alternatively, roll on the tables and see how 
the random rehreat outside the dungeon. 

20 Rolf twice, ignoring results of 20, 

Wilderness Coals 

d20 Goal 

1 Locate a dungeon or other site of interest (roll on 
the Dungeon Goals table to find out why), 

2 Assess the scope of a natural or unnatural disaster. 

3 Escort an NPC to a destination, 

4 Arrive at a destination without being seen by the 
villain's forces, 

5 Stop monsters from raiding caravans and farms. 

6 Establish trade with a distant town. 

7 Protect a caravan traveling to a distant town. 

8 Map a new land, 

9 Find a place to establish a colony, 

10' Find a natural resource. 

11 Hunt a specific monster. 

12 Return home from a distant place, 

13 Obtain information from a reclusive hermit. 

14 Find an object that was lost in the wilds, 

15 Discover the fate of a missing group of explorers, 

16 Pursue fleeing foes. 

17 Assess the size of an approaching army, 

18 Escape the reign of a tyrant, 

1 9 Protect a wilderness site from attackers. 

20 Roll twice, ignoring results of 20. 



CHAPTER 3 ! CREATING ADVENTURES 




















OlVi'E'ft oOAVS 


d 12 

Coal 

1 

Seize control of a fortified location such as a 

fortress, town, or ship. 

2 

Defend a location from attackers. 

3 

Retrieve an object from inside a secure location in 

a settlement. 

4 

Retrieve an object from a caravan. 

5 

Salvage an object or goods from a lost vessel or 

carav
Adventure ?aieone 


d20 

Patron 

d20 

Patron 

D2 

Retired adventurer 

15 

Old friend 

3-4 

Local ruler 

16 

Former teacher 

5-6 

Military officer 

17 

Parent or other 

7-8 

Temple official 


family member 

9-10 

Sage 

IS 

Desperate 

11-12 

Respected elder 


commoner 

13 

Deity or celestial 

19 

Embattled 

14 

Mysterious fey 

20 

merchant 

Villain posing as a 
patron 


3, Flesh Out the Location Details 

Chapter 5 offers suggestions for creating and fleshing 
out an adventure location, including tables that can 
help you establish the important elements of a dungeon* 
wilderness area* or urban setting, 

4, Find the Ideal Introduction 

An adventure can begin with a social interaction 
encounter in which the adventurers find out what they 
must do and why, Tt can start with a surprise attack, 
or with the adventurers coming across information by 
accident* The best introductions arise naturally from the 
goals and setting of the adventure. Let the entries in the 
Ad ve n t u re 1 n t rod action table inspire y o u. 

Adventure Introduction 

d 12 Introduction 

1 While traveling in the wilderness, the characters 
fall into a sinkhole that opens beneath their feet, 
dropping them into the adventure location. 

2 While traveling in the wilderness, the characters 
notice the entrance to the adventure location, 

3 While traveling on a road, the you shape the end of your adventure. 

-□venture Climax 

dl 2 Climax 

The adventurers confront the main villain and a 
group of minions in a bloody battle to the finish. 

2 The adventurers chase the villain while dodging 
obstacles designed to thwart them, leading to a final 
confrontation in or outside the villain’s refuge. 

3 The actions of the adventurers or the villain result 
in a cataclysmic event that the adventurers must 
escape. 

4 The adventurers race to the site where the villain is 
bringing a master plan to its conclusion arriving 
just as that plan is about to be completed. 

5 The villain and two or three lieutenants perform 
separate rites in a large room. The adventurers 
must disrupt all the rites at the same time. 

6 An ally betrays the adventurers as they’re about to 
achieve their goal. (Use this climax carefully, and 
don't overuse it.) 

7 A portal opens to another plane of existence. 
Creatures on the other side spill out, forcing the 
adventurers to dose the portal and deal with the 
villain at the same time. 

8 Traps, hazards, or animated objects turn against 
the adventurers while the main villain attacks. 

9 The dungeon begins to collapse while the 
adventurers face the main villain, who attempts to 
escape in the chaos. 

10 A threat more powerful than the adventurers 
appears, destroys the main villain, and then turns 
its attention on the characters. 

11 The adventurers must choose whether to pursue 
the fleeing main villain or save an NPC they care 
about or a group of innocents, 

12 The adventurers must discover the main villain’s 
secret weakness before they can hope to defeat that 
villain. 

6. Plan Encounters 

After youVe created the location and the overall story of 
ihe adventure, it's time to plan out the encounters that 
make up that adventure. In a location-based adventure, 
most cncou nters are keyed to specific locations on 
a map. For each room or wilderness area on the 
adventure map, your key describes whats in that area: 
its physical features, as well as any encounter that plays 
out there. The adventure key turns a simple sketch 
of numbered areas on graph paper into encounters 
designed to entertain and intrigue your players. 

See “Creating Encounters" later in this chapter for 
guidance on crafting individual encounters. 


Event-Based Adventures 

In an event-based adventure, the focus is on what the 
characters and villains do arid what happens as a 
result. The question of where those things happen is of 
secondary importance. 

Building an event-based adventure is more work than 
building a location-based one, but the process can be 
si mpli lie d by fo 11 ow i n g a nu mbe r of st ra i g h L forwa r d 
steps. Several steps include tables from which you 
can choose adventururders. 

If you need additional inspiration, consider a few 
different options for how the vilIain’s actions unfold over 
the course of the adventure. 


Event-Based Villain 

d€ Type of Actions 

1 Big event 

2 Crime spree 

3 Growing 
corruption 


Actions 


d6 

Type of Actions 

4 

One and done 

5 

Serial crimes 

6 

Step by step 


Big Event . The villain’s plans come to fruition during 
a festival, an astrological event, a holy (or unholy) rite, a 
royal wedding, the birth of a child, or some similar fixed 
time. The villain’s activities up to that point are geared 
toward preparation for this event. 

Crime Spree „ The villain commits acts that become 
bolder and more heinous over time, A killer might start 
out by targeting the destitute in the city slums before 
moving up to a massacre in the marketplace, increasing 
the horror and the body count each time. 










Growing Corruption, As time passes, the villain's 
power and influence grow, affecting more victims 
across a larger area. This might take the form of armies 
conquering new territory, an evil cult recruiting new 
members, or a spreading plague, A pretender to the 
throne might attempt to secure the support of the 
kingdom s nobility in the days or weeks leading up to a 
coup* or a guild leader could corrupt the members of a 
town council or bribe officers of the watch. 

One and Done, Thght up in the villain's plans, and 
what exactly they must do to foil those plans. 


Event-Based Goals 


d20 

Coal 

1 

Bring the villain to justice. 

2 

Clear the name of an innocent NPC. 

3 

Protect or hide an NPC. 

4 

Protect an object. 

5 

Discover the nature and origin of a strange 
phenomenon that might be the villain's doing. 

6 

Find a wanted fugitive. 

7 

Overthrow a tyrant. 

£ 

Uncover a conspiracy to overthrow a ruler. 

9 

Negotiate peace between enemy nations or feuding 
families. 

10 

Secure aid from a ruler or council. 

n 

Help a villain find redemption. 

12 

Parley with a villain. 

13 

Smuggle weapons to rebel forces. 

14 

Stop a band of smugglers. 

15 

Gather intelligence on an enemy force. 

16 

Win a tournament. 

17 

Determine the villain’s identity. 

IS 

Locate a stolen item. 

19 

Make sure a wedding goes off without a hitch. 

20 

Roll twice, ignoring results of 20, 


For example, you roll a 10 on the table, indicating that 
the party's goal is to secure aid from a ruler or council 
You decide to connect that to the leadership of the order 
t a rge te d by yo u r va m p ire villain, M ay be t he o rd er' s 
leaders have a chest of jewels stolen from the vampire 
centuries ago, and the characters can use the chest as 
bait to trap the villain. 


AFTER 3 ! CREATING At 

















- Identify Important NPCs 

. have on the villain’s overall plan? What can 
villain do to compensate? 

One way to track a villain’s reactions is by using a 
w chart. This might grow out of the timeline that 
scribes the villain’s plans, outlining liovv the villain 
_ is back on track after the adventurers thwart its plans. 

r the flowchart could be separate from the timeline, 
-sowing the various actions the adventurers might take 
md the villain’s response to those actions. 

o* Detail Key Locations 

A nee locations aren’t the focus of the adventure, they 
an be simpler and smaller than a dungeon complex 
: r an expanse of wilderness. 1 hey might be sped lie 
j cat ions in a city, or even individual rooms in locations 
here combat is likely to break out or significant 
xploration is needed, such as a throne room, a guild 
headquarters* a vampire's crumbling manor, or a 
nights' chapterhouse. 

7. Choose an Introduction and a Climax 
he Adventure Introduction table in the "Location- 
Based Adventures" section offers fun possibilities 
: or hooking the characters into the events of your 
adventure, including dreams, hauntings* and a simple 
lea for help. The Adventure Climax table in that same 
section includes adventure endings that work just as 
well for event-based adventures. 

For example* the Adventure Introduction tabic helps 
you decide that an ally the adventurers care about needs 
'heie* 

Sec "Creating Encounters' 1 later in this chapter for 
guidance on crafting individual encounters. 

Mysteries _ 

A mystery is a form of event-based adventure that 
usually focuses on the adventurers’ efforts to solve a 
crime, usually a robbery or murder. Unlike the writer of 
a mystery novel, a Dungeon Master can t always predict 
what the characters will do in a mystery adventure. 

A villain whose actions are crime spree,’ "one and 
done." or "serial crimes ' might inspire you to craft 
a mystery adventure around that villain's crimes. 
Similarly, if the adventurers’ goals include determining 
the villain's identity, that might be part of a mystery. 

To build a mystery adventure, follow the steps for 
creating any event-based adventure* Then consider 
three additional elements for the adventure: the victim, 
the suspects, and the clues. 

Victim 

Think about the victim’s relationship to the villain. 
Though you can create a strong scenario with no such 
relationship, part of what makes a mystery exciting is 
the discovery of the twisted connections between NPCs 
and how those connections led to the crime* A random 
killing might be just as mysterious, but it lacks that 
emotional connection. 

Also look for a connection between the victim and one 
or more of the adventurers. One surefire way to draw 
adventurers into a mystery- including making them 
suspectect a suspect to the crime, typically 
by shedding light on the suspect's motive, means, or 
opportunity. Some clues connect the wrong suspect 
to the crime, leading the adventurers in the wrong 
direction. Eventually, they must find other clues pointing 
in a different direction, or come across evidence that 
absolves the suspect. 

It’s better to populate your adventure with too many 
clues than too few. If the adventurers solve the mystery 
too quickly, you might feel some disappointment but 
the players will feel a sense of accomplishment. If the 
mystery is too hard, though, the players w ill become 
frustrated. Since you have to account for the possibility 
that the adventu rers wi ] 1 o verlooksome clues, usc 
redundant clues to ensure that the players have the 
knowledge needed to catch the villain. 

Intrigue _ 

Intrigue adventures are event-based adventures that 
revolve around power struggles. Intrigues are common 
in the courts of the nobility, but power struggles can 
play out just as easily in merchants' guilds, crime 
syndicates, and temple hierarchies. 

Rather than dark events and villainous plots, an 
intrigue adventure typically revolves around the 
exchange of favors, the rise and fall of individuals 
in power and influence, and the honeyed words of 
diplomacy. A prince's efforts to be named heir to the 
throne, a courtier's ambition to sit at the queen a 
single villain, such as a noble plotting the assassination 
of a monarch. However, an intrigue adventure can have 
multiple villains or no villain at all. 

No Villain . Some intrigue adventures revolve around 
the exchange of favors in the absence of a villain. For 
this type of adventure, skip steps 1 and 2 of the event- 
based adventure creation process (the villain and the 
villain’s actions) and move straight to the adventurers’ 
goals in step 3, Figure out why the adventurers become 
involved in the intrigue, then spend the bulk of your time 
creating the NPCs they interact with. 

Many Villains, Some intrigue adventures feature 
a whole cast of villains, each with its own goals, 
motivations, and methods. The adventurers might be 
drawn into the struggle of a court full of nobles vying 
for the throne in the wake of the king’s sudden death, 
or could find themselves negotiating the end to a deadly 
turf war among thieves’ guilds. In this scenario, youTl 
spend a lot of time on steps 1 and 2, developing each of 
the major NPCs as a distinct villain with an agenda. 

In step 5, you’ll need to develop each villain's reactions 
to the potential setbacks they face during the adventure. 
However, you don’t need to put equal effort into detailing 
the reactions of every villain, since many will likely 
echo each other or cancel each other out. Whenever 
the adveircus 

11-12 Arrival of an important NPC 

13-14 Arrival of marching modrons 

15-16 Artistic performance 

17-18 Athletic event 

^9-20 Birth of a child 

21-22 Birthday of an important NPC 

23-24 Civic festival 

25-26 Comet appearance 

27-28 Commemoration of a past tragedy 

29-30 Consecration of a new temple 

31-32 Coronation 

33-34 Council meeting 

35-36 Equinox or solstice 

37-38 Execution 

39-40 Fertility festival 

41-42 Full moon 

43-44 Funeral 

45-46 Graduation of cadets or wizards 
47-48 Harvest festival 
49-50 Holy day 

51-52 Investiture of a knight or other noble 
53-54 Lunar eclipse 
55-58 Midsummer festival 
59-60 Midwinter festival 
61-62 Migration of monsters 
63-64 Monarch’s ball 
65-66 New moon 
67-68 New year 
69-70 Pardoning of a prisoner 
71-72 Planar conjunction 
73-74 Planetary alignment 
75-76 Priestly investiture 
77-78 Procession of ghosts 
79-80 Remembrance for soldiers lost in war 
81-82 Royal address or proclamation 
83-84 Royal audience day 
85-86 Signing of a treaty 
87-88 Solar eclipse 
89-91 Tournament 
92-94 Trial 
95-96 Violent uprising 
97-98 Wedding or wedding anniversary 
99-00 Concurrence of two events (roll twice, ignoring 
results of 99 or 100) 



i’. ■ 


Complications 

Sometimes an adventure isn’t as straightforward as it 
might seem. 


Moral Quandaries 


If you want to give the characters a crisis that no amounween catching or hurting the villain and saving 
innocent lives. For example, the adventurers might 
learn that the villain is camped nearby, but they also 
learn that another part of the villain's forces is about 
to march into a village and burn it to the ground. The 
characters must choose between taking out the villain 
or protecting innocent villagers, some of whom might be 
friends or family members. 

Respect Quandary, I wo i important a I lies give 
conflicting directions or advice to the adventurers. 
Perhaps the high priest counsels the characters to 
negotiate peace with militaristic elves in the nearby 
forest, while a veteran warrior urges them to prove their 
strength with a decisive first strike. The adventurers 
can't follow both courses, and whichever ally they 
choose, the other loses respect for them and might no 
longer aid them. 


dlO Twist 

1 The adventurers are racing against other creatures 
with the same or opposite goaf, 

2 The adventurers become responsible for the safety 
of a noncombatant NPC 

3 The adventurers are prohibited from killing the 
villain, but the villain has no compunctions about 
killing them, 

4 The adventurers have a time limit, 

5 The adventurers have received false or extraneous 
information. 

6 Completing an adventure goal fulfills a prophecy or 
prevents the fulfillment of a prophecy. 

7 The adventurers have two differenrange 
phenomenon in the area, 

8 Secure the aid of a character or creature in the area. 

Creating Encounters 

Encounters are the individual scenes in the larger story 
:■your adventure. 

First and foremost, an encounter should be fun for 
he players. Second, it shouldn’t be burden for you to 
run* Beyond that, a well-crafted encounter usually has 
: straightforward objective as well as some connection 
:> the overarching story of your campaign, building on 
he encounters that precede it while foreshadowing 
ncounters yet to come. 

An encounter has one of three possible outcomes: 
he characters succeed, the characters partly succeed, 
jr the characters fail. The encounter needs to account 
or all three possibilities, and the outcome needs to 
have consequences so that the players feel like their 
successes and failures matter. 

Character Objectives 

When players don't know what they're supposed to do 
in a given encounter, anticipation and excitement can 
quickly turn to boredom and frustration, A transparent 
•objective alleviates the risk of players losing interest. 

For example t if the overall story of your adventure 
involves a quest to deliver a priceless relic to a remote 
monastery, each encounter along the way is an 
opportunity to introduce a smaller objective that moves 
the quest forward. Encounters during the trip might 
see the adventurers accosted b or apt to risk the lives of the 
adventurers through dubious decisions. The object the 
adventurers have sworn to protect might be sentient, 
cursed, or difficult to transport. 

Retrieve an Object The adventurers must gain 
possession of a specific object in the area of the 
encounter, preferably before combat finishes. As a 
complication, enemies might desire the object as much 
as the adventurers do f forcing both parties to fight for it* 

Run a Gauntlet The adventurers must pass through 
a dangerous area. This objective is similar to retrieving 
an object insofar as reaching the exit is a higher priority 
than killing opponents in the area. A time limit adds a 
complication, as does a decision point that might lead 
characters astray. Other complications include traps, 
hazards, and monsters. 

Sneak In, The adventurers need to move through the 
encounter area without making their enemies aware 
of their presence. Complications might ensue if they 
are detected. 

Stop a Ritual. The plots of evil cult leaders, 
malevolent warlocks, and powerful fiends often involve 
rituals that must be foiled. Characters engaged in 
stopping a ritual must typically fight their way through 
evil minions before attempting to disrupt the ritual's 
powerful magic. As a complication, the ritual might 
be close to completion when the characters arrive, 
imposing a time limit. Depending on the 
of the fight, and there's a slim chance that one or more 
characters might die. 

Deadly . A deadly encounter could be lethal for one or 
more player characters. Survival often requires good 
tactics and quick thinking, and the party risks defeat, 

XP Thresholds by Character Level 


Evaluating Encounter Difficulty 

Use the following method to gauge the difficulty of any 
combat encounter. 

1. Determine XP Thresholds. First, determine the 
experience point (XP) thresholds for each character in 
the party. The XP Thresholds by Character Level table 
below has four XP thresholds for each character level, 
one for each category of encounter difficulty. Use a 
character s level to determine his or her XP thresholds. 
Repeat this process for every character in the party. 

2* Determine the Party f s XP Threshold. For each 
category of encounter difficulty, add up the characters’ 
XP thresholds. This determines the party’s XP 
threshold. You 1 11 end up with four totals, one for each 
category of encounter difficulty* 

For example, if your party includes three 3rd-level 
characters and one 2nd-level character, the party's 
totaled XP thresholds would be as follows: 


Character 

Level 

Easy 

— Encounter Difficulty — 

Medium Hard 

Deadly 

1st 

25 

50 

75 

100 

2nd 

50 

100 

150 

200 

3rd 

75 

150 

225 

400 

4th 

125 

250 

375 

500 






5tfl 

25lenge rating is significantly below 
the average challenge rating of the other monsters in the 
group unless you think the weak monsters significantly 
contribute to the difficulty of the encounter. 

Encounter Multipliers 

Number of Number of 

Monsters Multiplier Monsters Multiplier 


1 


7-10 


x 1 

x 2.5 

2 

x 1.5 

11-14 

x 3 

-6 

x 2 

15 or more 

x 4 


5• Compare XP* Compare the monsters’ adjusted XP 
value to the party’s XP thresholds. The closest threshold 
that is lower than the adjusted XP value of the monsters 
determines the encounters difficulty. 


C 11A PTE R 3 | G RE AI’] N G AD V E > 









r example, an encounter with one bugbear and 
rree hobgoblins has an adjusted XP value of 1.000. 

- ming it a hard encounter for a party of three 3rd4evel 
meters and one 2nd-leveJ character (which has 
-d encounter threshold of 825 XP and a deadly 
- rounter threshold of 1,400 XP)* 

: rty Size 

” preceding guidelines assume that you have a party 
-fisting of three to live adventurers, 
the party contains fewer than three characters, 
a: ply the next highest multiplier on the Encounter 
fit[pliers table. For example* apply a multiplier of 
z when the characters fight a single monster, and a 
ikiplier of 5 for groups of fifteen or more monsters. 

If the party contains six or more characters, use the 
: lowest multiplier on the table. Use a multipnsters is at least 550 XP 
(the party's threshold for a medium encounter) and 
no more than 825 XP (the party's threshold for a hard 
encounter), A single monster of challenge rating 3 (such 
as a manticore or owl bear) is worth 700 XP, so that's 
one possibility. If you want a pair of monsters, each 
one will count for 1.5 times its base XP value. A pair of 
dire wolves (worth 200 XP each) have an adjusted XP 
value of 600, making them a medium encounter for the 
party as well. 

To assist with this approach, appendix B presents a 
list of all monsters in the Monster Manual organized by 
challenge rating. 

The Adventuring Day 

Assuming typical adventuring conditions and average 
luck, most adventuring parties can handle about six 
to eight medium or hard encounters in a day. If the 
adventure has more easy encounters, the adventurers 
can get through more. If it has more deadly encounters, 
t h cy c a n handle fcwe r. 

In the same way you figure out the difficulty of an 
encounter, you can use the XP values of monsters and 
other opponents in an adventure as a guideline lor how 
far the party is likely to progress. 

For each character in the party, use the Adventuring 
Day XP table to estimate how much XP that character is 
expected to earn in a day. Add together the values of all 
party members to get a total for the party's adventuring 
day. This provides a rough estimatemy has cover, and the party doesn't. 

The characters are unable to see the enemy. 

- T he characters are taking damage every rou nd from 

s me environmental effect or magical source* and the 
rnemy isn’t* 

* The characters are hanging from a rope, in the midst 

f scaling a sheer wall or cliff, stuck to the floor, or oth¬ 
erwise in a situation that greatly hinders their mobility 
r makes them sitting ducks. 

Situational benefits are similar to drawbacks except 

■ _ii they benefit the characters instead of the enemy* 

Fun Combat Encounters _ 

T ~ following features can add more fun and suspense 
a combat encounter: 

Terrain features that pose inherent risks to both the 

characters and their enemies, such as a frayed rope 

bridge and pools of green slime 

Terrain features that provide a change of elevation, 

mch as pits, stacks of empty crates, ledges, 

and balconies 

* features that either inspire or force c h a racters and 
:heir enemies to move around, such as chandeliers* 
kegs of gunpowder or oil, and whirling blade traps 

- Enemies in hard-to-reach locations or defensive 
positions, so that characters who normally attack at 
range are forced to move around the battlefield 
Different types of monsters working together 

Random Encounters 

- characters explore a wilderness area or dungeon 
mplex, they are bound to encounter the unexpected, 

Random enc can 
benefit the characters instead of hindering or harming 
them. Helpful creatures or NPCs might provide the 
adventurers with useful information or assistance 
when they need it most. 

* Add interest. Random encounters can reveal details 
about your world. They can foreshadow danger or 
provide hints that will help the adventurers prepare 
for the encounters to come. 

* Reinforce campaign themes. Random encounters 
can remind the players of the major themes of the 
campaign* For example, if your campaign features an 
ongoing war between two nations, you might design 
random encounter tables to reinforce the ever-present 
nature of the conflict* In friendly territory, your tables 
might include bedraggled troops returning from bat¬ 
tle, refugees fleeing invading forces, heavily guarded 
caravans full of weapons, and lone messengers on 
horseback riding for the front lines* While charac¬ 
ters are in hostile territory, the tables might include 
battlefields littered with the recently slain, armies of 
evil humanoids on the march, and improvised gib¬ 
bets holding the bodies of deserters who tried to flee 
the conflict. 

Random encounters should never be tiresome to you 
or your players. You don’t want the players to feel as if 
they aren't making progress because another random 
encounter brings their progress to a halt whenever they 
try to move forward. Likewise, ys. You then roll on an 
appropriate random encounter table to determine what 
the adventurers meet, rerolling if the die result doesn't 
make sense given the dreuinstances. 

Random encounter tables might be provided as part 
of the adventure you're running, or you can use the 
information in this chapter to build your own. Creating 
your own tables is the best way to reinforce the themes 
and flavor of your home campaign. 

Not every run-in with another creature counts as 
a random encounter. Encounter tables don't usually 
include rabbits hopping through the undergrowth, 
harmless rats scurrying through dungeon halls, or 
average citizens walking through the streets of a city. 
Random encounter tables present obstacles and events 
that advance the plot, foreshadow important elements or 
themes of the adventure, and provide fun distractions. 


Creating Random Encounter Tables 

Creating your own random encounter tables is 
straightforward. Determine what sort of encounters 
might occur in a given dungeon area, figure out the 
likelihood of a particular encounter occurring, then 
arrange the results. An '‘encounter" in this case could be 
a single monster or NFC, a group of monsters or N PCs. 
a random event (such as an earth tremor or a parade), 
or a random discovery (such as a charred corpse or a 
message scrawled on a wall). 

Assemble Your Encounters* Once you've establers 
arc more interesting when they happen in memorable 
locations. Outdoors the adventurers might be crossing 
a forest clearing when they encounter a unicorn or 
be pushing through a dense section of forest wdien 
they come across a nest of spiders. Crossing a desert, 
characters might discover an oasis haunted by wights or 
a rocky outcropping on which a blue dragon perches. 

Probabilities* A random encounter table can be 
created in a number of ways* ranging from simple (roll 
ld6 for one of six possible encounters) to complicated 
(roll percentile dice, modify for time of day, and cross* 
index the modified number with the dungeon level). The 
sample encounter table presented here uses a range of 
2 to 20 (nineteen entries total), generated using 1 d 12 
+ ld8. The probability curve ensures that encounters 
appearing in the middle of the tabic arc more likely to 
occur than encounters placed at the beginning or end 
of the table, A roll of 2 or 20 is rare (about a 1 percent 
chance of either), while each of the rolls from 9 to 13 
occurs a little over 8 percent of the time* 

The Sylvan Forest Encounters table is an example 
of a random encounter table that implements the ideas 
mentioned above. Creature names in bold refer to slat 
blocks that appear in the Monster Manual. 












*• 

t 


Random Encounter Challenge 

Random encounters need not be level-appropria plant with 2d4 glowing berries. A 
creature that ingests a berry becomes invisible 
for 1 hour, or until it attacks or casts a spell. 
Once picked, a berry loses its magic after 
12 hours. Berries regrow at midnight, but if 
all its berries are picked, the plant becomes 
nonmagical and grows no more berries. 

An elven tune carried on a gentle breeze 
ld4 orange (75%) or blue (25%) faerie dragons 
1 druid (elf). The druid is initially indifferent 
toward the party but becomes friendly if the 
characters agree to rid the forest of its gnoll 
infestation. 

1 treant. The treant is friendly if the party 
includes one or more elves or is accompanied by 
a visible fey creature. The treant is hostile if the 
characters are carrying open flames. Otherwise, 
it is indifferent and doesn’t announce its 
presence as the characters pass by, 

1 unicorn 




Sylvan Forest Encounters 

dl2 + d8 Encounter 

2 1 displacer beast 

3 1 gnoll pack lord and 2d4 gnolls 

4 ld4 gnolls and 2d4 hyenas 

5 A grove of burned trees. Characters searching 
the area and succeeding on a DC 10 Wisdom 
(Survival) check find gnoll tracks. Following the 
tracks for ld4 hours leads to an encounter with 
gnolls, or the discovery of dead gnolls with elven 
arrows sticking out of their flea-ridden corpses. 

6 1 giant owl 

7 An ivy-covered statue of an elven deity or hero. 

S 1 dryad (50%) or ld4 satyrs (50%) 
whereas the 
□venturers are the stars. 

Quick NPCs 

\n NPC doesn’t need combat statistics unless it poses 
threat. Moreover, most NPCs need only one or two 
Qualities to make them memorable. For example, 

■, ;mr players will have no trouble remembering the 
no-nonsense blacksmith with the tattoo of the black rose 
n his right shoulder or the badly dressed bard with the 
broken nose. 

Detailed^ NPCs __ 

F:>r NPCs who play larger roles in your adventures, 
allow more time to flesh out their histories and 
ersonalities. As you'll see, ten sentences can sum up 
the main elements of a memorable NPC, one sentence 
for each of the following: 

- Occupation and history 

* Appearance 

* Abilities 

* Talent 

* Mannerism 

* Interactions with others 

* Useful knowledge 
I ■ Ideal 

- Bond 

* Flaw or secret 

Although the material here focuses on humanoid 
NPCs. you can adjust details to create monstrous 
NPCs as well. 

Occupation and History 

In one sentence, describe the NPC s occupation 
-nd provide a brief historical note that hints at the 
haracteFs past. For example, the NPC might have 
served in an army, been imprisoned for a crime, or 
adventured years ago. 


Appearance 

In one sentence, describe the NPC s most distinctive 
physical features. You can roll on the NPC Appearance 
table or choose a feature that suits the character. 

NPC Appearance 

d20 Featuresentence, describe something that your NPC can 
do that is special, if anything. Roll on the MFC Talents 
table or use it to spur your own ideas, 

NPC Talents 

d2G Talent 

1 Plays a musical instrument 

2 Speaks several languages fluently 

3 Unbelievably lucky 

4 Perfect memory 

5 Great with animals 

6 Great with children 

7 Great at solving puzzles 

8 Great at one game 

9 Great at impersonations 

10 Draws beautifully 

11 Paints beautifully 

12 Sings beautifully 

13 Drinks everyone under the table 

14 Expert carpenter 

15 Expert cook 

16 Expert dart thrower and rock skipper 

17 Expert juggler 

IS Skilled actor and master of disguise 

19 Skilled dancer 

20 Knows thieves' cant 

Mannerism 

In one sentence, describe one mannerism that will 
help players remember the NPC, Roll on the NPC 
Mannerisms and Quirks table or use it to generate your 
own ideas. 

NPC Mannerisms 

d2G Mannerism 

1 Prone to singing, whistling, or humming quietly 

2 Speaks in rhyme or some other peculiar way 

3 Particularly low or high voice 

4 Slurs words, lisps, or stutters 

5 Enunciates overly dearly 

6 Speaks loudly 

7 Whispers 

8 Uses flowery speech or long words 

9 Frequently uses the wrong word 

10 Uses colorful oaths and exclamations 

11 Makes constant jokes or puns 

12 Prone to predictions of doom 

13 Fidgets 

14 Squints 

15 Stares into the distance 

16 Chews so 

2 

■> 

Beauty 

Charity 

D o m i n at i o n 

Greed 

3 

4 

Greater good 

Life 

Might 

Pain 




5 

Respect 

Retribution 

6 

Self-sacrifice 

Slaughter 

d6 

Lawful Ideal 

Chaotic Ideal 

I 

Community 

Change 

2 

Fairness 

Creativity 

3 

Honor 

Freedom 

4 

Logic 

independence 

5 

Responsibility 

No limits 

6 

Tradition 

Whimsy 

d6 

Neutral Ideal 

Other Ideals 

1 

Balance 

Aspiration 

2 

Knowledge 

Discovery 




3 

4 

Live ana iei live 

Moderation 

kjJGry 

Nation 

5 

Neutrality 

Redemption 

6 

People 

Self-knowledge 


so 


CHAFTER 4 | CRE ATINC NONPLAVER CH ARACTEJR3 





Flaw or Secret 

In one sentence, describe the NPCs flaw—some 
element of the characters personality or history that 
could potentially undermine the character—or a secret 
that the NPC is trying to hide. 

The NPC Flaws and Secrets table provides several 
ideas. The backgrounds in the Player's Handbook 
can be used to create more detailed flaws. Player 
characters who uncover an NPCs flaw or secret can use 
what they’ve learned to influence the NPC in a social 
interaction (as discussed in chapter 8). 

NPC Flaws and Secrets 

dl2 Flaw or Secret 

1 Forbidden love or susceptibility to romance 

2 Enjoys decadent pleasures 

3 Arrogance 

4 Envies another creature's possessions or station 

5 Overpowering greed 

6 Prone to rage 

7 Has a powerfu









time to give it a bit of background, a distinctive quirk of 
appearance, and especially an ideal, a bond, and a flaw* 

As an example, consider the Xanathar. a beholder 
that runs extensive criminal operations in the city of 
Waterdeep. The Xanathar s spherical body is covered in 
leathery flesh with a texture similar to cobblestones. Its 
eyestalks are jointed like the legs of an insect, and some 
of the stalks have magic rings on them. The Xanathar's 
speech is slow and deliberate, and it prefers to turn its 
central eye away from creatures it speaks to* Like all 
beholders, it sees other creatures as inferiors, though 
it understands the usefulness of its humanoid minions. 
The Xanathar uses the sewers beneath Waterdeep to 
access virtually any location within or under the city. 

The Xanathar s ideal is greed. It craves powerful 
magic items and surrounds itself with gold, platinum, 
and precious gems, its bond is to its lair—an elaborate 
cavern complex carved out between the twisting sewers 
of Waterdeep, which it inherited from its predecessors 
and cherishes above all else. Its flaw is a weakness for 
exotic pleasures: finely prepared foods, scented oils, and 
rare spices and herbs. 

Establishing this information allows you to play the 
Xanathar as more than an ordinary beholder. The 
complexities of the creature’s characterization create 
more memorable members receive equal 
party shares of XP, they will gain levels more quickly 
tha n the adventurers (the benefit of studying under such 
experienced masters), and might eventually catch up to 
them. It also means the adventurers’ advancement is 
slowed somewhat, as they must share their XP with an 
NPC shouldering only part of the adventuring burden. 

Powerful monsters that are an appropriate challenge 
for higher-level characters can deal enough damage to 
instantly kill or incapacitate a low-level follower. The 
adventurers should expect to spend effort and resources 


92 


CHAPTER 4 i CREATING 


I R CH ARACTERS 











protecting lower-level NFC party members and to 
provide healing when this protection fails. 

Ad venture r NPCs _ 

If yon don't have enough players to form a full party, 
iu can use NPCs to fill out the ranks. These NPCs 
should be the same level as the lowest-level adventurer 
in the party and built (either by you or your players) 
ising the character creation and advancement rules in 
the Player’s Handbook. Its easiest on you if you let the 
players create and run these supporting characters. 

Encourage players to role play supporting characters 
as true to the NPCs' personality traits, ideals, bonds, 

..lid flaws as possible, so that they don’t come across 
as automatons. If you don't feel that an NPC is being 
: <rtrayed well, you can taNPC is currently 
a. her a player's control), 

An NPC’s loyalty score increases by ld4 if other party 
embers help the NPC achieve a goal tied to its bond. 

1 kewise, an NPCs loyalty score increases by ld4 if 
NPC is treated particularly well (for example, given 
= magic weapon as a gift) or rescued by another party 
mber. An NPCs loyalty score can never be raised 
hove its maximum. 

When other party members act in a manner that 
runs counter to the NFC's alignment or bond t reduce 
NPCs loyalty score by ld4. Reduce the NPCs 
yalty score by 2d4 if the character is abused, misled, 
r endangered by other party members for purely 
selfish reasons. 


An NPC whose loyalty score drops to 0 is no longer 
loyal to the party and might part ways with them. A 
loyalty score can never drop below 0. 

An NPC with a loyalty score of 10 or higher risks life 
and limb to help fellow party members. If the NPC s 
loyalty score is between 1 and 10, its loyalty is tenuous. 
An NPC whose loyalty drops to 0 no longer acts in the 
party’s best interests. The disloyal NPC either leaves the 
party (attacking characters who attempt to intervene) or 
works in secret to bring about the party's downfall. 

Contacts 

Contacts are NPCs with close ties to one or more of 
the player characters. They don't go on adventures. 


but they can provide information, rumors, supplies, or 
professional advice,in an 
adventure, and most require little development. When 
adventurers hire a coach to carry them across town 
or need a letter delivered, the driver or messenger 
is a hireling, and the adventurers might never even 
converse with that NPC or learn his or her name, A 
ship captain carrying the adventurers across the sea is 
also a hireling, but such a character has the potential 
to turn into an ally, a patron, or even an enemy as the 
adventure unfolds. 

When the adventurers hire an NPC for long-term 
work, add the cost of that NPCs services to the 
characters' lifestyle expenses. See the “Additional 
Expenses’' section of chapter 6. “Between Adventures/' 
for more information. 

Extras 

Extras are the characters and creatures in the 
background that the main characters rarely, if ever, 
interact with. 

Extras might be elevated to more important roles by 
virtue of adventurers singling them out. I'or instance, a 
player might be hooked by a passing reference you make 
to a street urchin and try to strike up a conversation 
with the youngster. Suddenly, an extra on whom you 
placed no importance becomes a centra! figure in an 
improvised roleplaying scene. 

Whenever extras arc present, be prepared to come up 
with names and mannerisms on the fly. In a pinch, you 
can plunder the race-specific character names found in 
chapter 2, “Races." of the Players Handbook . a region or incite a rebellion 


2 

Seize control of an army 


3 

Become the power behind the throne 


4 

Cain the favor of a ruler 

7 

Revenge (d4) 


1 

Avenge a past humiliation or insult 


2 

Avenge a past imprisonment or injury 


3 

Avenge the death of a loved one 


4 

Retrieve stolen property and punish the thief 

S 

Wealth {d4) 


1 

Control natural resources or trade 


2 

Marry into wealth 


3 

Plunder ancient ruins 


4 

Steal land, goods, or money 


CHAPTER 4 ! CREATING MON PLAYER CHARACTERS 












W _la i n J s Methods 

d20 Methods 



1 

Agricultural devastation (d4) 



1 

Blight 

B 


2 

Crop failure 



3 

Drought 



4 

Famine 


2 

Assault or beatings 


3 

Bounty hunting or assassination 


4 

Captivity or coercion (dlO) 

■ 


1 

Bribery 



2 

Enticement 

1 


3 

Eviction 



4 

Imprisonment 

t 


5 

Kidnapping 



6 

Legal intimidation 

B 


7 

Press gangs 



S 

Shackling 

E 


9 

Slavery 



10 

Threats or harassment 


5 

Confidence scams (d6) 



1 

Breach of contract 



2 

Cheating 



3 

Fast talking 



4 

Fine print 



5 

Fraud or swindling 



6 

Quackery or tricks 


6 

Defamation (d4) 



1 

Framing 



2 

Gossiping or slander 



3 

Humiliation 



4 

Libel or insults 


7 

Dueling 


8 

Execution (dS) 



1 

Beheading 



2 

Burning at the stake 



3 

Burying alive 



n 


3 

Massacre 


4 Mercenaries 

5 Rebellion 

6 Terrorism 



* C H A FT EE 1 ; CR EAT I N G NONE LAY E R C H A R ACTE RS 


* 














Villain's Weakness 



The Death domain is concerned with the forces that 
cause death, as well as the negative energy that gives 
rise to undead creatures. Deities such as Chemosh. 
Myrkiil. and Wee Jas are patrons of necromancers, 
death knights, Itches, mummy lords, and vampires. 
Gods of the Death domain also embody murder (Amibis 
Bhaah and Pyremius), pain (luz or Loviatar), disease 
or poison (Incabulos, Talona, or Morgion), and the 
underworld (Hades and Hel). 

Death Domain Spells 

Cleric Level Spells 

1st fahe life, ray of $ickness 

3rd blindness/deafness, my of enfeeblement 

5th animate dead, vampiric touch 

7th blight T death ward 

9th antilife shell , ctoudkilt 

Bonus Proficiency 

When the cleric chooses this domain at 1st level, he or 
she gains proficiency with martial weapons. 

Reaper 

At 1st level, the cleric learns one necromancy cantrip 
of his or her choice from any spell list. W hen the cleric 
casts a necromancy cantrip that normally targets only 
one creature, the spell can instead target two creatures 
within range and within 5 feet of each other. 


Villain s Secret Weakness 

Finding and exploiting a villain s weakness can be 
very gratifying for players, although a smart villain 
tries to conceal ilevel, the cleric can use Channel Divinity 
-: destroy another creature's life force by touch. 

When the cleric hits a creature with a melee attack. 

- rleric can use Channel Divinity to deal extra 
e rone damage to the target. The damage equals 5 + 
rn :. e his or her cleric level. 

~ escapable Destruction 

- rting at 6th level, the cleric s ability to channel 
negative energy becomes more potent. Necrotic damage 
i ik by the characters cleric spells and Channel 

I mity options ignores resistance to necrotic damage. 

Divine Strike 

Sth level, the cleric gains the ability to infuse his or 
her weapon strikes with necrotic energy. Once on each 
_ : the cleric's turns when he or she hits a creature with a 
i: -oon attack, the cleric can cause the attack to deal an 
e rra id8 necrotic damage to the target. When the cleric 
r aches 14th level, the extra damage increases to 2d8. 

Improved Reaper 

" rting at 17th level, when the cleric casts a 
r : romancy spell of 1st through Sth level that targets 
crjy one creature, the spell can instead target two 

- mires within range and within 5 feet of each other. If 
spell consumes its material components, the cleric 

— jst provide them for each target. 

Paladin: Oathbreaker 

jAn Oathbreaker is a paladin who breaks his or her 

- red oaths to pursue some dark ambition or serve an 

1 power. Whatever light burned in the paladinthe paladin. On a failed save, 
the target is frightened of the paladin for 1 minute. If a 
creature frightened by this effect ends its turn more than 
30 feet away from the paladin, it can attempt another 
Wisdom saving throw to end the effect on it. 

Aura of Hate 

Starting aL 7th level, the paladin, as well any fiends and 
undead within 10 feet of the paladin* gains a bonus 
to melee weapon damage rolls equal to the paladin’s 
Charisma modifier (minimum of +1), A creature can 
benefit from this feature from only one paladin at a time. 

At 18th level, the range of this aura increases to 30 feet. 

Supernatural Resistance 

At 15th level, the paladin gains resistance to 
bludgeoning, piercings and slashing damage from 
nonmagical weapons. 

Dread Lord 

At 2Qth-level, the paladin can, as an action, surround 
himself or herself with an aura of gloom that lasts for 1 
minute. The aura reduces any bright light in a 30-foot 
radius around the paladin to dim light* Whenever an 
enemy that is frightened by the paladin starts its turn 
in the aura, it takes 4dl0 psychic damage. Additionally, 
the paladin and creatures he or she chooses in the aura 
are draped in deeper shadow. Creatures that rely on 
sight have disadvantage on attack rolls against creatures 
draped in this shadow. 

While the aura lasts, the paladin can use a bonus 
action on his or her turn to cause the shadows bterranean monster lairs, labyrinths 
riddled with death traps* natural 
caverns extending for miles beneath the 
surface of the world* and ruined castles. 

Not every adventure takes place in a dungeon* A 
wilderness trek across the Desert of Desolation or a 
I arrowing journey into the jungles of the Isle of Dread 
ran be an exciting adventure in its own right. In the 
great outdoors* dragons w heel across the sky in search 
: prey, tribes of hobgoblins pour forth from their grim 
fortresses to wage war against their neighbors, ogres 
plunder farmsteads for food, and monstrous spiders 
drop from the web-shrouded canopies of trees. 

Within a dungeon, adventurers are constrained by 
w ails and doors around them* but in the wilderness, 
adventurers can travel in almost any direction they 
r lease* i herein lies the key difference between dungeon 
_ rsd wilderness: it's much easier to predict where the 
iventuring party might go in (he dungeon because the 
i prions are limited less so in the wilderness. 

Villages, towns* and cities are cradles of civilization 
in a dangerous world, but they too offer opportunities 
adventure* Encounters with monsters might seem 
ten likely within a city's walls* but urban settings have 
- heir own villains and perils. Evil* after all, takes many 
rms, and urban settings aren't always the safe havens 
hey seem to be. 

This chapter provides an o35-38 

In a cliff face 

39-42 

In a desert 

43-46 

In a forest 

47-50 

In a glacier 

51-54 

In a gorge 

55-58 

In a jungle 

59-62 

In a mountain pass 

63-66 

In a swamp 

67-70 

Beneath or on top of a mesa 

71-74 

In sea caves 

75-78 

In several connected mesas 

79-82 

On a mountain peak 

83-86 

On a promontory 

S7-90 

On an isiand 

91-95 

Underwater 

96-00 

Roll on the Exotic Location table 


Exotic Location 

d20 Location 

1 Among the branches of a tree 

2 Around a geyser 

3 Behind a waterfall 

4 Buried in an avalanche 

5 Buried in a sandstorm 

6 Buried in volcanic ash 

7 Castle or structure sunken in a swamp 

S Castle or structure at the bottom of a sinkhole 

9 Floating on the sea 

10 In a meteorite 

11 On a demiplane or in a pocket dimension 

12 In an area devastated by a magical catastrophe 

13 On a cloud 

14 In the Feywild 

15 In the Shadow fell 

16 On an island in an underground sea 

17 In a volcano 

IS On the back of a Gargantuan living creature 

19 Sealed inside a magical dome of force 

20 I n s i de a Mordenkainen*s magnificent mansion 

Dungeon Creator 

A dungeon reflects its creators* A lost temple of the 
yuan-ti, choked by overgrown jungle plants* might 
feature ramps instead of stairs. Caverns carved by a 



t: fi APTE R 5 | A DV E NT U RE i : NVIRON M E NTS 






beholder’s disintegration eye ray have wallsarth cult 

7-8 

Elemental Fire cult 

9-10 

Elemental Water cult 

11-15 

Worshipers of an evil deity 

16-17 

Worshipers of a good deity 

18-20 

Worshipers of a neutral deity 


NPC Alignment 


d20 

Alignment 

d20 

Alignment 

1-2 

Lawful good 

10-11 

Neutral 

3-4 

Neutral good 

12 

Chaotic neutral 

5-6 

Chaotic good 

13-15 

Lawful evil 

7-9 

Lawful neutral 

16-18 

Neutral evil 



19-20 

Chaotic evil 
























HP C Class 


d2G 

Class 

d2G 

Class 

1 

Barbarian 

9 

Paladin 

2 

Bard 

10 

Ranger 

3-4 

Cleric 

11—14 

Rogue 

5 

Druid 

IS 

Sorcerer 

6-7 

Fighter 

16 

Warlock 

S 

Monk 

17-20 

Wizard 

Dungeon Purpose 

Except in the case of a natural cavern, a dungeon 
is crafted and inhabited fora specific purpose that 
influences its design and features* You can choose a 
crpose from the Dungeon Purpose table, roll one at 
random, or use your own ideas. 

Dungeon Purpose 



d20 

Purpose 

d20 

Purpose 

1 

2-5 

Death trap 

Lair 

11-14 

15-17 

Stronghold 
Temple or shrine 

6 

Maze 

18-19 

Tomb 

7-9 

Mine 

20 

Treasure vault 

10 

Planar gate 




Death Trap, This dungeon is built to eliminate any 
reature that dares to enter it. A death trap might guard 
the treasure of an insane wizard, or it might he designed 
lure adventurers to their demise for some nefarious 
jrpose, such as to feed souls n help shape the dungeon s current state. 


The Dungeon History table notes key events that 
can transform a site from its original purpose into a 
dungeon for adventurers to explore. Particularly old 
dungeons can have a history that consists of multiple 
events, each of which transformed the site in some way. 


Dungeon History 


d2Q 

Key Event 

1-3 

Abandoned by creators 

4 

Abandoned due to plague 

5-8 

Conquered by invaders 

9-10 

Creators destroyed by attacking raiders 

11 

Creators destroyed by discovery made withirr the 
site 

12 

Creators destroyed by internal conflict 

13 

Creators destroyed by magical catastrophe 

14-15 

Creators destroyed by natural disaster 

16 

Location cursed by the gods and shunned 

17-18 

Original creator still in control 

19 

Overrun by planar creatures 

20 

Site of a great miracle 


Dungeon Inhabitants 

After a dungeon's creators depart, anyone or anything 
might move in* Intelligent monsters* mindless dungeon 
scavengers, predators and prey alike can be drawn 
to dungeons. 

The monsters in a dungeon are more than a 
collection of random creatures that happen to live 
near one another. Fungi, vermin, scavengers, and 
predators can coexist in a complex ecology, alongside 
intelligent creatures who share living space through 
elaborate combinations of domination, negotiation, and 
bloodshed. 

Characters might be avides plenty of opportunities for more subtle 
interaction. Dungeon denizens are used to striking 
unlikely alliances, and adventurers are a wild card that 
canny monsters seek to exploit. 

intelligent creatures in a dungeon have goals, whether 
as simple as short-term survival or as ambitious 
as claiming the entire dungeon as the first step in 
founding an empire. Such creatures might approach 
adventurers with an offer of alliance, hoping to prevent 
the characters from laying v^aste to their lair and to 
secure aid against their enemies. Bring the NFC leaders 
of such groups to life as described in chapter 4, fleshing 
out their personalities, goals, and ideals. Then use 
those elements to shape a response to the arrival of 
adventurers in their territory. 

Dungeon Ecology 

An inhabited dungeon has its own ecosystem. The 
creatures that live there need to eat, drink, breathe, and 
sleep, just as creatures in the wilderness do. Predators 
need to be able to seek prey, and intelligent creatures 
search for lairs offering the best combination of air, 
food, water, and security. Keep these factors in mind 
when designing a dungeon you want the players to 
believe in. If a dungeon doesn't have some internal logic 
to it, adventurers will find it difficult to make reasonable 
decisions w ithin that environment. 

For example, characters who find a pool of fresh water 
in a dunmap from a published adventure or randomly 
generate a dungeon complex using the tables presented 
in appendix A, 

CH APTEfc 5 ! ADVENT U RE ENVI RON MENTS 


A dungeon can range in size from a few chambers 
in a ruined temple to a huge complex of rooms and 
passages extending hundreds of feet in all directions. 
The adventurers’ goal often lies as far from the dungeon 
entrance as possible, forcing characters to delve 
deeper underground or push farther into the heart of 
the complex, 

A dungeon is most easily mapped on graph paper, 
w ith each square on the paper representing an area of 
10 feet by 10 feet. (If you play with miniatures on a grid, 
you might prefer a scale wdiere each square represents 5 
feet, or you can subdivide your 10-foot grid into a SToot 
grid w hen you draw your maps for combat.) When you 
draw your map, keep the following points in mind: 

* Asymmetrical rooms and map layouts make a 
dungeon less predictable. 

* Think in three dimensions. Stairs, ramps, platforms, 
ledges, balconies, pits, and other changes of elevation 
make a dungeon more interesting and make combat 
encounters in those areas more challenging, 

- Give the dungeon some wear and tear. Unless you 
want to stress that the dungeons builders were 
extraordinarily skillful, collapsed passages can be 
commonplace, cutting off formerly connected sections 
of the dungeon from each othels. 

Walls are sometimes adorned with murals, frescoes, 
bas-reliefs, and lighting fixtures such as sconces or 
torch brackets. A few even have secret doors built 
into them. 





CAIALOneb 


CN£ flQD.AJRe t^LHLTi IL- 






Doors 

?JS s d ?to Sit' f “' wi,hi " plal ” >rete 

gargoyles or Jeering f ^ esto °ned with carvings of 
rereai clues as to Sa^'S’^Sd”’ SiS " S ' ha ' 

-£!3Si5St sr° ften bec °™ s “ 

a successful Strung* check. Chapter7 -rJ™' "T” 

guidelines for setting * e l£ 

- - *»■ 

» successful Strength cS sma/hT T ^ 

Piece, by dealing enough da,page ,oT„ r T “ 

spell or similar magic Chapter 5 n 3 knock 

* ic- '-napter 8 provides guidelines 



5ample Dungeon Map 



S 






other objects" ^ ^ Statistic * t0 doors a 

can be opened normally from the barred ° r 

an action to lift the bar from its braced X USing 

Secret Doors 

surrounds it. t hf 

marks on the floor betrav the secret ° r SCU 

Detecting a Seem Door. Use thl rh * presence - 
passive Wisdom (Percentiord e characters 

whether anyone in the party LtSsecmd "" 

without actively searching for it Tha ' door 

find a secret door hv a t 8 Cila meters can also 

"here ,h. door is 


CHAPTER 5 


A D VI. KTURL EN Vi RQ N M E N TS 







































































































































rug having been recently disturbed. 

Portcullises 

A portcullis is a set of vertical bars made of wood or 
iron, reinforced with one or more horizontal bands. It 
blocks a passage or archway until it is raised up into 
the ceiling by a winch and chain. The main benefit of a 
portcullis is that it blocks a passage while still allowing 
guards to watch the area beyond and make ranged 
attacks or cast spells through it. 

Winching a portcullis up or down requires an action. 

If a character can’t reach the winch (usually because it is 
on the other side of the portcullis), lifting the portcullis 
or bending its bars far enough apart to pass through 
them requires a successful Strength check. The DC 
of the check depends on the size and weight of the 
portcullis or the thickness of its bars. To determine an 
appropriate DC. see chapter 8. 

Darkness and Light 

Darkness is the default condition inside an underground 
complex or in the interior of aboveground ruins, but an 
inhabited dungeon might have light sources. 


r 


f.: H A FT E R 5 I A D V E N T UKI E N V 1 i R O N M F NTS 

















in subterranean settlements, even races that have 
: rkvision use fire for warmth, cooking, and defense. 

But many creatures have no need of warmth or light. 

- iventurers must bring their own sources of light into 
iusty tombs where only undead stand guard, abandoned 
ruins teemi hazards described here are but a few examples of 
:he environmental dangers found underground and in 
ther dark places. Dungeon hazards are functionally 
similar to traps, which are described at the end of 
:his chapter. 

Detecting a Hazard. No ability check is required 
:o spot a hazard unless it is hidden, A hazard that 
resembles something benign, such as a patch of slime 
r mold, can be correctly identified with a successful 
Intelligence (Nature) check. Use the guidelines in 
hap ter 8 to set an appropriate DC for any check made 
to spot or recognize a hazard. 

Hazard Severity* To determine a hazard’s deadliness 
relative to the characters, think of the hazard as a trap 
and compare the damage it deals with the party’s level 
using the Damage Severity by Level table later in the 
chapter (the table also appears in chapter 8). 

Brown Mold 

Brown mold feeds on warmth, drawing heat from 
anything around it, A patch of brown mold typically 
covers a 10-foot square, and the temperature within 30 
feet of it is always frigid. 


When a creature moves to within 5 feet of the mold 
for the first time on a turn or starts its turn there, it 
must make a DC 12 Constitution saving throw, taking 
22 (4dl0) cold damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. 

Brown mold is immune to fire, and any source of fire 
brought within 5 feet of a patch causes its to snare prey. These web-filled 
areas are difficult terrain. Moreover, a creature entering 
a webbed area for the first time on a turn or starting its 
turn there must succeed on a DC 12 Dexterity saving 
throw or become restrained by the webs, A restrained 
creature can use its action to try to escape, doing 
so with a successful DC 12 Strength (Athletics) or 
Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. 

Each 10-foot cube of giant webs has AC 10, 15 
hit points, vulnerability to fire, and immunity to 
bludgeoning, piercing, and psychic damage. 

Yellow Mold 

Yellow mold growrs in dark places, and one patch covers 
a 5-foot square. If touched, the mold ejects a cloud of 
spores that fills a 10-foot cube originating from the 
mold. Any creature in the area must succeed on a DC 
15 Constitution saving throw or take 11 (2d 10) poison 
damage and become poisoned for 1 minute. While 
poisoned in this way, the creature takes 5 (Id 10) poison 
damage at the start of each of its turns. The creature 
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a successful save. 

Sunlight or any amount of fire damage instantly 
destroys one patch of yellow mold. 


CHAPTER 5 


ADVE NTU RE EKVI RON M E NTS 






Wilderness 

Between the dungeons and settlements of your 
campaign world He meadows, forests, deserts, mountain 
ranges, oceans, and other tracts of wi water, and 
rocks covered with slimy brown moss—can be a signal 
that the adventurers are drawing close to the site of evil 
power that is their destination or can provide clues to 
the nature of the threats to be found there. 


Specific wilderness locations might have their own 
special features. For example, the Spirit Forest and 
the Spiderhaunt Woods might feature different kinds 
of trees, different kinds of flora and fauna, different 
weather, and different random encounter tables. 

Finally, a wilderness trek can be enhanced by calling 
attention to the weather. “You spend the next three 
days crossing the swamp" sounds less harrowing than. 
"You spend the next three days trudging through knee- 
deep mud--the first two days and nights in the pouring 
rain, and then another day under the beating sun, with 
swarms of hungry insects feasting on your blood." 

Hour-by-Hour Approach_I 

Sometimes the journey deserves as much time and 
attention as the destination. If wilderness travel features 
prominently in your adventure and isn’t something you 
want to gloss over, you will need more than a descriptive 
overview to bring a long and harrowing journey to life; 
you’ll need to know f the party’s marching order and have 
encounters at the ready. 

Let your players determine the party’s marching 
order (see the Players Handbook for more information). 
Characters ige each one in a slightly different way to 
keep your players’ interest. If one encounter comes 
at the adventurers from the front, the next one might 
come at them from above or behind. If an encounter 
features stealthy monsters, a character tending to the 
party’s pack animals might get the first indication that 
monsters are near when a pony whickers nervously. I f 
an encounter features loud monsters, the party might 
have the option to hide or set an ambush. One group of 
monsters might attack the party on sight, and another 
might allow safe passage for food. 

Reward characters for searching while they travel by 
providing things for them to find. Broken statues, tracks. 


CHAPI ER 5 | AD VENTl RE EN V E RON ME NTS 









--z 




1 , 


£1 














abandoned campsites, and other finds can add flavor to 
vour world, foreshadow future encounters or events, or 
provide hooks for further adventures. 

A wilderness journey might take multiple sessions to 
play out. That said, if the wilderness journey includes 
long periods with no encounters, use the travel-montage 
approach to bridge gaps between encounters. 

Mapping a Wilderness 

In contrast to a dungeon, an outdoor setting presents 
seemingly limitless options. The adventurers can move 
in any direction over a trackless desert or an open 
grassland, so how r do you as the DM deal with all the 
possible s, and so on—that can guide 
character movement across your map. 

Movement on the Map 

Narrate wilderness travel at a level of detail appropriate 
to the map you Ye using. If you're tracking hour-by-hour 
movement on a province-scale map (1 hex = 1 mile), 
you can describe each hamlet the adventurers pass. 

At this scale, you can assume that the characters find 
a noteworthy location when they enter its hex unless 
the site is specifically hidden. The characters might not 
walk directly up to the front door of a ruined castle when 
they enter a hex, but they can find old paths, outlying 
ruins, and other signs of its presence in the area. 

If you’re tracking a journey of several days on a 
kingdom-scale map (1 hex = 6 miles)* don't bother with 
details too small to appear on your map. It’s enough 
for the players to know that on the third day of their 
journey, they cross a river and the land starts rising 
before them, and that they reach the mountain pass two 
days later. 


WlLDERNESS FEATURES 

No wilderness map is complete without a few 
settlements, strongholds, ruins, and other sites worthy 
of discovery, A dozen such locations scattered over an 
area roughly 50 miles across is a good start. 

Monster Lairs 

A wilderness area approximately 50 miles across can 
support roughly a half-dozen monster lairs, but probably 
no more than one apex predator such as a drre to your wilderness. 

Settlements 

Settlements exist in places where food, water, farmland, 
and building materials are abundant. A civilized 
province roughly 50 miles across might have one city, a 
few rural towns, and a scattering of villages and trading 
posts. An uncivilized area might have a single trading 
post that stands at the edge of a wild frontier, but no 
larger settlements. 

In addition to settlements, a province might contain 
ruined villages and towns that are either abandoned or 
serve as lairs for marauding bandits and monsters. 


C H AFTLR 5 AD VENTURE EN VI RON MENTS 









Strongholds 

Strongholds provide the local population with protection 
in times of trouble. The number of strongholds in an 
area depends on the dominant society, the population, 
[he strategic importance or vulnerability of the region, 
and the wealth of the land. 

Weird Locales 

Weird locales make the fantastic and the supernatural 
an intrinsic part of vour wilderness adventures. 

Weird Locales 

d20 Locale 

I -2 Dead magic zone (similar to an antimagic field) 

3 Wild magic zone (roll on the Wild Magic Surge 
table in the Player's Handbook whenever a spell is 
cast within the zone) 

4 Boulder carved with talking faces 

5 Crystal cave that mystically answers questions 

6 Ancient tree containing a trapped spirit 
7-8 Battlefield where lingering fog occasionally 

assumage automatically 
succeed on the saving thrown as do creatures wearing 
cold weather gear (thick coats, gloves, and the like) and 
creatures naturally adapted to cold climates. 

Extreme Heat 

When the temperature is at or above 100 degrees 
Fahrenheit, a creature exposed to the heat and 
w ithout access to drinkable water must succeed on 
a Constitution saving throw at the end of each hour 
or gain one level of exhaustion. The DC is 5 for the 
first hour and increases by 1 for each additional hour. 
Creatures wearing medium or heavy armor, or who are 
clad in heavy clothing, have disadvantage on the saving 
throw. Creatures with resistance or immunity to fire 
damage automatically succeed on the saving throw, as 
do creatures naturally adapted to hot climates. 

Strong Wind 

A strong wind imposes disadvantage on ranged weapon 
attack rolls and Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on 
hearing, A strong wind also extinguishes open flames, 
disperses fog, and makes flying by non magi cal means 
nearly impossible. A flying creature in a strong wind 
must land at the end of its turn or fall. 

A strong wand in a desert can create a sandstorm that 
imposes disadvantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks 
that rely on sight. 

Heavy Precipitation 

Everything within an area of heavy rain or heavy 
snowfall is lightly obscured, and creatures in the area 
have disadvantage on Wisdom (Perl 
cast within range reveals its presence. 

Undead standing on desecrated ground have 
advantage on all saving throws, 

A vial of holy water purifies a 10-foot-square area of 
desecrated ground when sprinkled on it, and a hallow 
spell purifies desecrated ground within its area. 

Frigid Water 

A creature can be immersed in frigid water for a 
number of minutes equal to its Constitution score before 
suffering any ill effects, Each additional minute spent 
in frigid water requires the creature to succeed on a 
DC 10 Constitution saving throw or gain one level of 
exhaustion. Creatures with resistance or immunity to 
cold damage automatically succeed on the saving throw 
as do creatures that are naturally adapted to living in 
ice-cold w^ater. 

Quicksand 

A quicksand pit covers the ground in roughly a 10-foot- 
square area and is usually 10 feet deep. When a creature 
enters the area, it sinks 1d4 + 1 feet into the quicksand 
and becomes restrained. At the start of each of the 
creature's turns, it sinks another ld4 feet. As long as 
the creature isn’t completely submerged in quicksand, 
it can escape by using its action and succeeding on a 
Strength check. The DC is 10 plus the number of feet 
the creature has sunk into the quicksand. A creature 
that is completely submerged in quicksand can’t breathe 
(se e the su ffo cat ion r u 1 e s in the Player s Ha ndbo ok ), 

val) check whenever you call for 
it, with the DC determined by the abundance of food and 
water in the region. 


Foraging DCs 

Food and Water Availability DC 

Abundant food and water sources 10 

Limited food and water sources 15 

Very little, if any; food and water sources 20 


If multiple characters forage, each character makes 
a separate check. A foraging character finds nothing 
on a failed check. On a successful check, roll ld6 + the 
haracter’s Wisdom modifier to determine how much 
food (in pounds) the character finds, then repeat the roll 
for water (in gallons). 


Food and Water 

The food and water requirements noted in the Player's 
Handbook are for characters. Horses and other 
creatures require different quantities of food and water 
per day based on their size. Water needs are doubled if 
the weather is hot. 


Food and Water Needs 


Creature Size 

Tiny 

Small 

Medium 

Large 

Huge 

Gargantuan 


Food per Day 
1/4 pound 
1 pound 
1 pound 
4 pounds 
16 pounds 
64 pounds 


Water per Day 
1/4 gallon 
1 gallon 
1 gallon 
4 gallons 
16 gallons 
64 gallons 


Becoming Lost _ 

Unless they are following a path, or something like it, 
adventurers traveling in the wilderness run the risk of 
becoming lost. The party's navigator makes a Wisdom 
(Survival) check when you decide it s appropriate, 
against a DC determined by the prevailing terrain, as 
shown othat way lies madness. 

Rando m Settle ments _ 

The following tables allow you to quickly create a 
settlement. They assume that you've already determined 
its size and its basic form of government. 

Race Relations 

d20 Result 

I- 10 Harmony 

II- 14 Tension or rivalry 

15-16 Racial majority are conquerors 

17 Racial minority are rulers 

IS Racial minority are refugees 

19 Racial majority oppresses minority 

20 Racial minority oppresses majority 

Ruler’s Status 

d20 Ruler 

1-5 Respected, fair, and just 

6-S Feared tyrant 

9 Weakling manipulated by others 

10 Illegitimate ruler, simmering civil war 

11 Ruled or controlled by a powerful monster 

12 Mysterious, anonymous cabal 

13 Contested leadership, open fighting 

14 Cabal seized power openly 

15 Doltish lout 

16 On deathbed, claimants compete for power 
17-18 Iron-wilied but respected 

19-20 Religious leader 



Notable Traits 

d20 Trait 

1 Canals in place of streets 

2 Massive statue or monument 

3 Grand temple 

4 Large fortress 

5 Verdant parks and orchards 

6 River divides town 

7 Major trade center 

8 Headquarters of a powerful family or guild 

9 Population mostly wealthy 

10 Destitute, rundown 

11 Awful smell (tanneries, open sewers) 

12 Center of trade for one specific good 

13 Site of many battles 

14 Site of a mythic or magical event 

15 Important library or archive 

16 Worshipfines of a town or city can sometimes force 
characters to dash into buildings* When you need to 
flesh out a building quickly, roll on the Building Type 
table* Then roll on the table corresponding to that 
building to add further detail. 

If a roll makes no sense considering where the 
characters are (such as a lavish mansion in a rundown 
part of town), you can always roll again or simply choose 
another result However, such unexpected results can 
prompt creativity and memorable locations that help 
make your urban encounters distinct. 

Building Type 

d2G Type 

I- 10 Residence [roll once on the Residence table) 

II- 12 Religious (roil once on the Religious Building table) 
13-15 Tavern (roll once on the Tavern table and twice on 

the Tavern Name Generator table) 

16-17 Warehouse (roll once on the Warehouse table) 

18-20 Shop (roll once on the Shop table] 

Residence 

d20 Type 

1-2 Abandoned squat 

3-8 Middle-class home 

9—10 Upper-class home 

11-15 Crowded tenement 

"6-17 Orphanage 

IS Hidden slavers' den 

19 Front for a secret cult 

20 Lavish, guarded mansion 

Religious Building 

d2Q Type 

1-10 Temple to a good or neutral deity 

"1-12 Temple to a false deity (run by charlatan priests) 

13 Home of ascetics 

‘4-15 Abandoned shrine 

6-17 Library dedicated to religious study 
‘8-20 Hidden shrine to a fiend or an evil deity 



Type 

Quiet, low-keapons/armor 

19 

Mason 

10 

Chandler 

20 

Scribe 


Mapping a Settlement 

When you draw a map for a settlement in your game, 
donh worry about the placement of every building, and 
concentrate instead on the major features. 

For a village* sketch out the roads, including trade 
routes leading beyond the village and roads that connect 
outlying farms to the village center* Note the location of 
the village center. If the adventurers visit specific places 
in the village* mark those spots on your map* 

For towns and cities* note major roads and waterways 
as well as surrounding terrain. Outline the wails 
and mark the locations of features you know will be 
important: the lord's keep, significant temples* and 
the like. For cities, add internal walls and think about 
the personality of each ward. Give the wards names 
reflecting their personalities, which also identify 
the kinds of trades that dominate the neighborhood 
(Tannery Square, Temple Row), a geographical 
characteristic (Hilltop, Riverside), or a dominant site 
(the Lords' Quarter), 

Urban Encounters 

Although they hold the promise of safety, cities and 
towns can be just as dangerous as the darkest dungeon. 
Evil hides in plain sight or in dark corners. Sewers, 
shadowy alleys, slums, smoke-filled taverns, dilapidated 
tenements, and crowded marketplaces can quickly turn 
into battlegrounds. On top of that,
The Random Urban Encounters table is useful for 
city- and town-based adventures. Check for a random 
encounter at least once per day, and once at night if 
the characters are out and about. Reroll the result if it 
doesn't make sense given the time of day. 


Random Urban Encounters 


dl2 + d8 

Encounter 

2 

Animals on the loose 

3 

Announcement 

4 

Brawl 

5 

Bullies 

6 

Companion 

7 

Contest 

S 

Corpse 

9 

Draft 

10 Drunk 

11 

Fire 

12 

Found trinket 

13 

Guard harassment 

14 

Pickpocket 

15 

Procession 

16 

Protest 

17 

Runaway cart 

18 

Shady transaction 

19 

Spectacle 

20 

Urchin 


Animals on the Loose . The characters see one or 
more unexpected animals loose in the street. This 
challenge could be anything from a pack of baboons to 
an escaped circus bear, tiger* or elephant* 
Announcement. A herald, town crier, mad person, 
or other individual makes an announcement on a 
street corner for all to hear. The announcement might 
foreshadow some upcoming event (such as a public 
execution)* communicate important information to the 
general masses (such as a new royal decree)* or convey a 
dire omen or warning. 

Brawl . A brawl erupts near the adventurers. It could 
be a tavern brawl: a battle between rival factions, 
families, or gangs in the city; or a struggle between 
city guards and criminals. The characters could be 


CHAPTER 5e. 

Fire . A fire breaks out. and the characters have a 
chance to help put out the flames before it spreads. 

Found Trinket The characters find a random trinket. 
You can determine the trinket by rolling on the Trinkets 
table in the Players Handbook. 

Guard Harassment The adventurers are cornered 
by ld4 + I guards eager to throw their weight around. If 
threatened, the guards call out for help and might attract 
the attention of other guards or citizens nearby. 

Pickpocket A thief (use the spy statistics in the 
Monster Manual) tries to steal from a random character. 
Characters whose passive Wisdom (Perception) scores 
are equal to or greater than the thief’s Dexterity (Sleight 
of Hand) check total catch the theft in progress. 

Procession . The adventurers encounter a group of 
citizens either parading in celebration or forming a 
funeral procession. 

Protest The adventurers see a group of citizens 
peacefully protesting a new law or decree. A handful of 
guards maintain order. 

Runaway Cart A team of horses pulling a wagon 
races through the city streets. The adventurers must 
avoid the horses. If they stop the wagon, the owner (who 
is running behind the cart) is grateful. 

Shady Transaction* The characters witness a shady 
transaction between two cloaked figures. 

Spectacle* The characters witness a form of public 
entertainment, such as a talented bard's impation table earlier in this 
chapter to determine whether a ship veers off course* 

Random Encounters at Sea 
You can check for random encounters at sea as often 
as you would check for them on land (see chapter 3 for 
more information). The Random Encounters at Sea 
table presents a number of options and ideas. 

^-W 

Shipwrecks 

A shipwreck is a plot device that cart be used sparingly to 
great effect, particularly if you want the characters to be 
washed ashore on some monster-infested island or (in the 
case of an airship) dropped in the middle of some exotic 
land. There aren’t rules for determining when a shipwreck 
happens; it happens when you want or need it to happen. 

Even the strongest seafaring ship can founder in a storm, 
run aground on rocks or reefs t sink during a pirate attack, or 
be dragged underwater by a sea monster. A storm or hungry 
dragon can lay waste to an airship just as easily. A shipwreck 
has the potential to change the direction of a campaign, it 
isn’t however, a particularly good way to kill off characters or 
end a campaign. 

If you and your campaign conspire to wreck a ship on 
which the characters are traveling, it is assumed that the 
characters survive with the equipment they were wearing or 
carrying still in their possession. The fate of any MPCs and 
cargo aboard the wrecked ship is entirely up to you. 


Random Encounters at  t 000 gp 

3 mph 

40 

150 

10 

15 

300 

15 

towboat 

50 gp 

IV 2 mph 

1 

3 

— 

11 

50 

— 

Sailing ship 

10,000 gp 

2 mph 

20 

20 

100 

15 

300 

15 

. L , arship 

25,000 gp 

2 V 2 mph 

SO 

60 

200 

15 

500 

20 


In a dead calm (no wind), ships can't move under sail 
and must be rowed. A ship sailing against a strong wind 
moves at half speed. 

Visibility 

A relatively calm sea offers great visibility. From a 
row's nest, a lookout can spot another ship or a 
coastline up to 10 miles away, assuming clear skies. 
Overcast skies reduce that distance by half. Rain and 
fog reduce visibility just as they do on land. 

Owning a Ship 

At some point in your campaign, the adventurers 
light gain custody of a ship. They might purchase or 
apture one or receive one to carry out a mission. It's 
ap to you whether a ship is available for purchase, and 
you have the power to deprive the adventurers of a 
ship at any time should it become a nuisance (see the 
Shipwrecks'' sidebar). 

Crew . A ship needs a crew of skilled hirelings to 
function. As per the Players Handbook , one skilled 
ireling costs at least 2 gp per day. The minimum 
number of skilled hirelings needed to crew a ship 
depends on the type of vessel, as shown in the Airborne 
and Waterborne Vehicles table. 

You can track the loyalty of individual crew members 
r the crew as a whole usil or magic item works the same as 
travel on foot, as described in the Players Handbook . A 
creature that serves as a flying mount must rest 1 hour 
for every 3 hours it flies, and it can't fly for more than 
9 hours per day. Thus, characters mounted on griffons 
(which have a flying speed of 80 feet) can travel at S 
miles per hour, covering 72 miles over 9 hours with two 
1-hour-long rests over the course of the day. Mounts that 
don't tire (such as a flying construct) aren't subject to 
this limitation. 












As adventurers travel through the air, check for 
random encounters as you normally would. Ignore any 
result that indicates a non-flying monster, unless the 
characters are flying close enough to the ground to be 
targeted by non-flying creatures making ranged attacks. 
Characters have normal chances to spot creatures on 
the ground and can decide whether to engage them. 

Traps 

Traps can be found almost anywhere. One wrong step 
in an ancient tomb might trigger a series of scything 
blades, which cleave through armor and bone. The 
seemingly innocuous vines that hang over a cave 
entrance might grasp and choke anyone who pushes 
through them, A net hidden among the trees might drop 
on travelers who pass underneath. In the D&D game, 
unwary adventurers can fall to their deaths, be burned 
alive, or fall under a fusillade of poisoned darts. 

A trap can be eiotice small holes in the walls from which 
jets of flame will erupt, or otherw ise detect something 
that points to a trap’s presence. 

A traps description specifies the checks and DCs 
needed to detect it, disable it, or both, A character 


H! -►* 


i £0 


CHAPTER 5 1 ADVENTUREENVIP.ONMENTS 
















actively looking for a trap can attempt a Wisdom 
(Perception) check against the trap's DC, You can 
also compare the DC to detect the trap with each 
character's passive Wisdom (Perception) score to 
determine whether anyone in the party notices the 
trap in passing. If the adventurers detect a trap before 
triggering it, they might be able to disarm it, either 
permanently or long enough to move past it. You might 
call for an Intelligence (Investigation) check for a 
character to deduce what needs to be done, followed 
by a Dexterity check using thieves’ tools to perform the 
necessary sabotage. 

Any character can attempt an Intelligence (Arcana) 
check to detect or disarm a magic trap, in addition to 
any other checks noted in the trap’s description. The 
DCs are the same regardless of the check used* In 
addition, dispel magic has a chance of disabling most 
magic traps. A magic trap’s description provides the DC 
for the ability check made when you use dispel magic. 

In most cases, a trap's description is clear enough 
that you can adjudicate whether s* 
Such traps might have hidden levers that disable their 
riggers, or a secret door might conceal a passage that 
goes around the trap* 

Trap Effects 

The effects of traps can range from inconvenient to 
deadly, making use of elements such as arrows, 
spikes, blades, poison, toxic gas, blasts of lire. 


and deep pits. The deadliest traps combine multiple 
elements to kill, injure, contain, or drive off any creature 
unfortunate enough to trigger them, A trap's description 
specifies what happens when it is triggered. 

The attack bonus of a trap, the save DC to resist its 
effects* and the damage it deals can vary depending on 
the trap s severity. Use the Trap Save DCs and Attack 
Bonuses table and the Damage Severity by Level table 
for suggestions based on three levels of trap severity. 

A trap intended to be a setback is unlikely to kill 
or seriously harm characters of the indicated levels, 
whereas a dangerous trap is likely to seriously injure 
(and potentially kill) characters of the indicated 
levels* A deadly trap is likely to kill characters of the 
indicated levels. 

Trap Save DCs and Attack Bonuses 

Trap Danger Save DC Attack Bonus 


Setback 

Dangerous 

Deadly 


10-11 

12-15 

16-20 


+3 to +5 
+6 to +8 
+9 to +12 


Damage Severity by Level 


Character Level 

Setback 

Dangerous 

Deadly 

1st-4th 

IdlO 

2dl0 

4dl0 

5 th—10 th 

2d10 

4dl0 
 the trip wire harmlessly. A 
character without thieves 1 tools can attempt this check 
with disadvantage using any edged weapon or edged 
tool On a failed check, the trap triggers. 

Anyone who inspects the beams can easily determine 
that they are merely wedged in place. As an action, 
a character can knock over a beam, causing the trap 
to trigger. 

The ceiling above the trip wire is in bad repair, 
and anyone who can see it can tell that it's in danger 
of collapse. 

When the trap is triggered, the unstable ceiling 
collapses. Any creature in the area beneath the unstable 
section must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving 
throw, taking 22 (4dl0) bludgeoning damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. Once 
the trap is triggered T the floor of the area is filled with 
rubble and becomes difficult terrain. 

Falling Net 
Mechanical trap 

This trap uses a trip wire to release a net suspended 
from the ceiling. 

The trip wire is 3 inches off the ground and stretches 
between two columns or trees. The net is hidden by 
cobwebs or foliage, ‘ he DC to spot the trip wire and net 
is 10. A successful DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves' 
tools breaks the trip wire harmlessly. A character 
without thieves' tools can attempt this check with 
disadvantage using any edged weapon or edged tool. On 
a failed check, the trap triggers. 

When the trap is trig 
successful dispel magic (DC 13) cast on the statue 
destroys the trap. 

Pits 

Mechanical trap 

Four basic pit traps are presented here. 

Simple Pit A simple pit trap is a hole dug in the 
ground. The hole is covered by a large cloth anchored on 
the pit’s edge and camouflaged with dirt anti debris. 

The DC to spot the pit is 10, Anyone stepping on the 
cloth falls through and pulls the cloth down into the pit. 
taking damage based on the pit s depth (usually 10 feet, 
but some pits are deeper). 

Hidden Pit This pit has a cover constructed from 
material identical to the floor around it. 

A successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check 
discerns an absence of foot traffic over the section 
of floor that forms the pit's cover, A successful DC 
15 Intelligence (Investigation) check is necessary to 
confirm that the trapped section of floor is actually the 
cover of a pit. 

When a creature steps on the cover, it swings open 
like a trapdoor, causing the intruder to spill into the 
pit below. The pit is usually 10 or 20 feet deep but can 
be deeper. 

Once the pit trap is detected, an iron spike or similar 
object can be wedged between the pits cover and the 
surrounding floor in such a way as to prevent the cover 
from opening, thereby making it safe to cross. The cover 
can also be magically held shut using the arcane lock 
spell or similar magic. 

Locking Pit This pit ty embedded in the surrounding 
walls* An area might include multiple pressure plates, 
each one rigged to its own set of darts. 

The tiny holes in the walls arc obscured by dust and 
cobwebs, or cleverly hidden amid bas-reliefs, murals, or 
frescoes that adorn the walls. The DC to spot them is 
15, With a successful DC 15 Intelligence (Investigation) 
check, a character can deduce the presence of the 
pressure plate from variations in the mortar and 
stone used to create it. compared to the surrounding 
door. Wedging an iron spike or other object under the 
pressure plate prevents the trap from activating. Stuffing 
ihe holes with cloth or wax prevents the darts contained 
within from launching* 

The trap activates when more than 20 pounds of 
weight is placed on the pressure plate, releasing four 
darts. Each dart makes a ranged attack with a +8 bonus 
against a random target within 10 feet of the pressure 
plate (vision is irrelevant to this attack roll). (If there are 
no targets in the area, the darts don't hit anything.) A 
mrget that is hit takes 2 (ld4) piercing damage and must 
succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw, taking 
1 (2d 10) poison damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. 

PorsoN Needle 

Mechanical trap 

\ poisoned needle is hidden within a treasure chest's 
ck, or in something else that a creature might open. 
Opening ttivation of the sphere requires all creatures present 
to roll initiative. The sphere rolls initiative with a -f 8 
bonus. On its turn, it moves 60 feet in a straight line. 

The sphere can move through creatures' spaces, and 
creatures can move through its space, treating it as 
difficult terra i n. W h e n e ve r t he s ph e re e nters a c re a t u re s 
space or a creature enters its space while it's rolling, 
that creature must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving 
throw or take 55 (lOdlO) bludgeoning damage and be 
knocked prone. 

The sphere stops when it hits a wall or similar barrier. 
If can’t go around corners, but smart dungeon builders 
incorporate gentle, curving turns into nearby passages 
that allow the sphere to keep moving. 

As an action, a creature within 5 feel of the sphere can 
attempt to slow it down with a DC 20 Strength check. 

On a successful check, the sphere's speed is reduced by 
15 feet. If the sphere's speed drops to 0, it stops moving 
and is no longer a threat. 

Sphere of Annihilation 
Magic trap 

Magical, impenetrable darkness fills the gaping mouth 
of a stone face carved into a wall. The mouth is 2 feet in 
diameter and roughly circular. No sound issues from it, 
no light can illuminate the inside of it, and any matter 
that enters it is instantly obliterated. 

A successful DC 20 Intelligence (Arcana) check 
reveals that the mouth contair chooses, from poverty to luxury. Chapter 
8. “Adventuring,” of that book describes some of 
the downtime activities they can pursue between 
adventures. This chapter fills in the gaps, describing 
ihe expenses of owning property and hiring NPCs, and 
a variety of additional downtime activities characters 
can pursue. The beginning of the chapter also offers 
suggestions for linking adventures together and keeping 
track of events in your campaign. 

Linking Adventures 

A campaign in the style of an episodic television show 
rarely needs story links between its adventures. Each 
adventure features its own villains, and once the 
characters complete the adventure, there are typically 
no loose plot threads. The next adventure presents 
an altogether different challenge having nothing to do 
with the adventure that preceded it. As the characters 
gain experience points, they become more powerful, 
as do the threats they must overcome. This kind of 
campaign is easy to run, since it requires little effort 
beyond finding or creating adventures appropriate for 
the party’s level. 

A campaign with a narrative lets the players feel as 
though their actions have far-reaching consequences. 
They're not just racking up experience points. A few- 
simple modifications can help you overlay overarching 
elements to create a serialized campaign in which early 
adventures help set upthe multiverse, before 
reassembling the artifact and using it to defeat a 
cosmic threat. 

Example 2 : Agents of X 
You can also build a campaign around the idea that 
the adventurers are agents of something larger than 
themselves—a kingdom or secret organization, for 
example. Wherever their allegiance lies, the adventurers 
are motivated by loyalty and the goal of protecting 
whatever it is they serve. 

The characters’ overarching mission might be to 
explore and map an uncharted region, forging alliances 
where they can and overcoming threats they encounter 
along the way. Their goal might be to find the ancient 
capital of a fallen empire, which lies beyond the realm 
of a known enemy and forces them to navigate hostile 
territory. The characters could be pilgrims in search 
of a holy site or members of a secret order dedicated 
to defending the last bastions of civilization in an ever- 
declining world. Or they might be spies and assassins, 
striving to weaken an enemy country by targeting its evil 
leaders and plundering its treasures. 

Planting Adve nture Seeds _ 

You can make a campaign feel like one story with many 
chapters by planting the seeds of the next adventure 
before the current one is finished. This technique can 
naturally moves the characters along to their next goal. 

If you’ve planted a seed well, the characters have 
something else to do whefor potential witnesses and suspects, 

* The characters receive an anonymous letter that 
sheds light on a plot or impending event of which they 
were previously unaware. 

Foreshadowing _ 

f oreshadowing is an exercise in subtlety, involving the 
delicate planting of seeds for future adventures. Mot all 
foreshadowing bears fruit, particularly if the clues are 
too subtle or if events conspire to take your campaign 
in a new direction. The goal of foreshadowing is to hint 
at upcoming events and new threats in your campaign 
without making it obvious to players that you’re telling 
them what the future holds. Here are a few examples: 

- An object worn or carried by an enemy has the symbol 
of a previously unknown organization engraved or 
written on it. 

* A mad woman standing on a street corner spouts 
fragments of an ancient prophecy, while pointing a 
crooked finger at the characters, 

* The king and queen announce the marriage of their 
son to the daughter of a neighboring monarch, but 
various factions oppose the union. Trouble is brewing. 

- Bugbear scouts are making incursions into civilized 
lands and spying on settlements, as a prelude to a 
hobgoblin warlord's invasion, 

* A puppet show in a market square predicts a tragic 
outcome if two noble houses on the cusp of declaring 
war on each other refuse to reconcile, 

* NPC adventurers in a city are being murin future adventures. Update it as the campau 
develops, adding ideas as they come to you. 

Character Notes, Write down the characters* 
backgrounds and goals, since these notes can help you 
design adventure content that provides opportunitiesrod 
eh a r ac te r de vel o p m e n t. 

Keep a running tally of the adventurers’ classes and 
levels, as well as any quests and downtime activities 
they’re engaged in. 

If the characters have a ship or stronghold, record it' 
name and whereabouts, as well as any hirelings in the 
characters’ employ. 

Player Handouts, Keep a copy of all handouts 
you make for your players so that you don’t have to 
remember their contents later. 

Adventure Log* Think of this log as an episode guide 
for your campaign. Summarize each game session 
or adventure to help you keep track of the unfolding 
campaign story. You can give your players access to this 
log as well, or to an edited version stripped of your notes 
and secrets. (The players might also keep their own 
record of adventures, w hich you can refer to if your owd 
log is incomplete,) 

NPC Notes* Record statistics and roleplaying notes 
for any NPC the characters interact with more than 
once. For example, your notes might differentiate 
important people In a town by their different voices, 
as well as their names, the places where they live 
and work, the names of their family m 

10 

"rTiple, small 

1 gP 

2 

— 

- awer T fortified 

25 gp 

TO 

-— 

fading post 

10 gp 

4 

2 


;■ 5 not unusual for adventurers—especially after 10th 
Hdefto gain possession of a castle, a tavern, or another 
c:ece of property. They might buy it with their hard-won 
■ \ take it by force, obtain it in a lucky draw from a 
: :k of many things, or acquire it by other means. 

The Maintenance Costs table shows the per-day 
Lpkeep cost for any such property. (The cost of a 
Drrmal residence isn't included here because it falls 

. Pr lifestyle expenses, as discussed in the Player’s 

Handbook.) Maintenance expenses need to be paid 
very 30 days. Given that adventurers spend much of 
iv- ir time adventuring, staff includes a steward who can 
-r. i ke payments in the party's absence. 

Total Cost per Day, The cost includes everything it 
kes to maintain the property and keep things running 
- moothly, including the salaries of hirelings. If the 
; ~ perty earns money that can offset maintenance costs 
|by charging fees, collecting tithes or donations, or 
- iing goods), that is taken into account in the table. 
Skilled and Untrained Hirelings* The Player “s 
Handbook explains the difference between a skilled 
ireling and an untrained one. 


Businesses 

An adventurer-owned business can earn enough money 
. cover its own maintenance costs. However, the 
.ve projects that require more time 
between adventures, such as building and maintaining a 
stronghold. As the party gains levels, you can add more 
downtime between adventures to give characters the 
time they need to pursue such interests. Whereas days 
or weeks might pass between low-level adventures, the 
amount of downtime between higher-level adventures 
might be measured in months or years. 


Maintenance Costs 


Downtime Activities 


CHA PT E R (j \ E El' W E E N A D V EN1 UR I. S 


127 












More Downtime Activities 


Chapter S T “Adventuring/’ of the Play ers Handbook 
describes a few downtime activities to fill the void 
between adventures. Depending on the style of your 
campaign and the particular backgrounds and interests 
of the adventurers, you can make some or all of the 
following additional activities available as options. 

Building a Stronghold 

A character can spend time between adventures 
building a stronghold. Before work can begin, the 
character must acquire a plot of land. If the estate lies 
within a kingdom or similar domain, the character 
will need a royal charter (a legal document granting 
permission to oversee the estate in the name of the 
crown), a land grant (a legal document bequeathing 
custody of the land to the character for as long as he 
or she remains loyal to the crown), or a deed (a legal 
document that serves as proes, 
binge drinking, gambling, or anything else that helps 
them cope with the perils they face on their adventures. 

A carousing character spends money as though 
maintaining a wealthy lifestyle (see chapter 5, 
“Equipment," of the Players Handbook). At the end of 
the period spent carousing, the player rolls percentile 
dice and adds the character s level, then compares the 
total to the Carousing table to determine what happens 
to the character, or you choose. 

* *ij : > ii A nrfifi 

,, 

CHAPTER 6 I BETWEEN ADVENTURES 


Carols sc 

rflOO - Level Result 

‘ -T You are ;ailec V J i= s at the end of the 
downtime per cd on charges of disorderly 
conduct a r ' c : slurb rg :ne peace. You ca" 
a fine of 10 gp to avoid jail time, or you can 
to resist arrest, 

11-20 You regain consciousness in a strange place 

with no memory of how you got there, and ■: - 
have been robbed of 3d6 x 5 gp. 

21-30 You make an enemy. This person, business, 
or organization is now hostile to you. The DM 
determines the offended party. You decide 
how you offended them. 

31-40 You are caught up in a whirlwind romance. 

Roll a d2Q. On a 1-5, the romance ends bac v. 
On a 6-10, the romance ends amicably. On a" 
11-20, the romance is ongoing. You determine 
the identity of the love interest, subject to 
your DfVTs approval. If the romance ends 
badly, you might gain a new flaw. If it ends we 
or is ongoing, your new love interest might 
represent a new bond, 

41-SO You earn modest winnings from gambling ar c 

recuperate your lifestyle expenses for the time 
spent carousing. 

Si-90 You earn modest winnings from gambling. 

You recuperate your lifestyle expenses for the 
time spent carousing and gain ld2Q x 4 gp, 

91 or higher You make a small fortune gambling. You 

recuperate your lifestyle expenses for the time 
spent carousing and gain 4d6 x 10 gp. Your 
carousing becomes the stuff of local legend. 

Crafting a Magic Item 

Magic items are the DM’s purview, so you decide how 
they fall into the party's possession. As an option, you 
can allow' player characters to craft magic items. 

The creation of a magic item is a lengthy, expensive 
task. To start, a character must have a formula that 
describes the construction of the item* The character 
must also be a spelicaster with spell slots and must 
be able to cast any spells that the item can produce* 
Moreover, the character must meet a level minimum 
determined by the item’s rarity, as shown in the Crafting 
Magic Items table. For example, a 3rd-level character 
could create a wand of magic missiles (an uncommon 
item), as long as the character has spell slots and can 















cast magic missile , That same character could make 
a +1 weapon (another uncommon item), no particular 
spell required, the components are 
: nsumed once each day of the item’s creation. 

Multiple characters can combine their efforts to 
r --ate a magic item if each of them meets the level 
- - requisite. Each character can contribute spells, spell 
i. ms. and components, as long as everyone participates 
curing the entire crafting process. Each character 
=n contribute 25 gp worth of effort for each day spent 
helping to craft the item. 

Normally, a character who undertakes this activity 
t r-faies a magic item described in chapter 7, “Treasure. ” 
your discretion, you can allow players to design their 
n magic items* using the guidelines in chapter 9, 

I l jngeon Master's Workshop.” 

While crafting a magic item, a character can maintain 
i modest lifestyle without having to pay the I gp per dav, 
cr : comfortable lifestyle at half the normal cost (see 
, ter 5, “Equipment,” of the Player's Handbook ), 

Gaining Renown 

iracter can spend downtime improving his or 
fc - renown within a particular organization (see 
vn' in chapter 1). Between adventures, a 
■ _■ racier undertakes minor tasks for the organization 
m s ocializes with its members. After pursuing these 
mn dcs for a combined number of days equal to his 
3 r current renown multiplied by 10. the character's 
jpeoown increases by 1, 


Performing Sacred Rites 

A pious character can spend time between adventures 
ness 

dioo + 

Days Result 

01-20 You must pay one and a halftimes the business's 
maintenance cost for each of the days. 

21-30 You must pay the business's full maintenance 
cost for each of the days. 

31-40 You must pay half the business's maintenance 
cost for each of the days. Profits cover the other 
half. 

41-60 The business covers its own maintenance cost for 
each of the days. 

61-S0 The business covers its own maintenance cost for 
each of the days. It earns a profit of ld6 x 5 gp. 
81-90 The business covers its own maintenance cost for 
each of the days. It earns a profit of 2dS x 5 gp, 

91 or The business covers its own maintenance cost for 
higher each of the days. It earns a profit of 3d 10 x 5 gp. 

Selling Magic Items 

Few people can afford to buy a magic item, and fewer 
still know how to find one. Adventurers are exceptional 
in this regard due to the nature of their profession, 

A character who comes into possession of a common, 
uncommon, rare, or very rare magic item that he or 
she wants to sell can spend downtime searching for a 
buyer. This downtime activity can be performed only in 
a city or another location where one can find wealthy 


CHAPTER § I BETWEEN AL>\ ENTURES 





individuals interested in buying magic items. Legendary 
magic items and priceless artifacts can't be sold during 
downtime. Finding someone to buy such an item can be 
tmetimes 
procure rare and very rare items through proxies to 
ensure that their identities remain unknown. If the 
buyer is shady, it s up to you whether the sale creates 
legal complications for the party later. 

Salable Magic Items 


Rarity 

Base Price 

Days to 

Find Buyer 

dI00 Roll 
Modifier- 

Common 

100 gp 

ld4 

+10 

Uncommon 

500 gp 

Id 6 

+0 

Rare 

5,000 gp 

IdS 

-10 

Very rare 

50,000 gp 

IdlO 

-20 


* Apply this modifier to rolls on the Selling a Magic Item table 


Selling a Magic !tem 


dl GO + Mod, 

20 Or lower 
21-40 

41-80 

81-90 

91 or higher 


You Find 

A buyer offering a tenth of the base price 
A buyer offering a quarter of the base price, 
and a shady buyer offering half the base price 
A buyer offering half the base price, and a 
shady buyer offering the full base price 
A buyer offering the full base price 
A shady buyer offering one and a half times 
the base price, no questions asked 


CHAPTER 6 | BETWEEN ADVENTURES 

130 




























Sowing Rumors 

Swaying public opinion can be an effective way to bring 
down a villain or elevate a friend. Spreading rumors 
is an efficient, if underhanded, way to accomplish that 
goal. Well-placed rumors can increase the subject’s 
standing in a community or embroil someone in 
scandal. A rumor needs to be simple, concrete, and hard 
:o disprove. An effective rumor also :owntime training or studying before they gain the 
: *rnefits of a new level. If you choose this option, once a 
c haracter has earned enough experience points to attain 
i new level, he or she must train for a number of days 
: -rfore gaining any class features associated with the 
sew level. 

The training time required depends on the level to be 
gained, as shown on the Training to Gain Levels table. 
The training cost is for the total training time. 


Training to Gain Levels 


Level Attained 
2nd-4th 
5th—1 Oth 
11 th—16th 
17th—20th 


Training Time 
10 days 
20 days 
30 days 
40 days 


Training Cost 

20 gp 

40 gp 

60 gp 
80 gp 


Creating Downtime Activities 

Your players might be interested in pursuing downtime 
activities that aren’t covered in this chapter or in 
the Players Handbook. If you invent new downtime 
activities, remember the following: 


• An activity should never negate the need or desire for 
characters to go on adventures. 

• Activities that have a monetary cost associated with 
them provide opportunities for player characters to 
spend their hard-won treasure. 

• Activities that reveal new adventure hooks and 
previously unknown facts about your campaign can 
help you foreshadow future events and conflicts. 

• For an activity you expect a character to repeat 
with variable degrees of success, consider creating 
a random outcoewels that can be found as treasure. 

Art Objects, Idols cast of solid gold, necklaces 
studded with precious stones, paintings of ancient 
kings, bejeweled dishes—art objects include all these 
and more. See the “Art Objects 1 section for types of 
decorative and valuable artworks that can be found 
as treasure* 

Magic Items, Types of magic items include armor, 
potions, scrolls, rings, rods, staffs* wands, weapons, 
and wondrous items. Magic items also have rarities: 
common, uncommon, rare, very rare, and legendary. 

Intelligent monsters often use magic items in their 
possession, while others might hide them away to 
ensure they don’t get lost or stolen. For example, if a 
hobgoblin tribe has a +1 longs word and an alchemy jug 
in its treasure hoard, the tribe’s warlord might wield the 
sword, while the jug is kept somewhere safe* 

Random Treasure 

The following pages contain tables that you can use 
to randomly generate treasures carried by monsters, 
stashed in their lairs, or otherwise hidden away. The 
placement of treasure is left to your discretion. The key 
is to make sure the players feel rewarded for playing, 
and that their characters are rewarded for overcoming 
dangerous challenges. 

Treasure T&kljes _ 

Treasure can be randomly allocated based on a 
monster s challenge rating. There are tables for 
hallenge rating 0-4* challenge rating 5-10, chall tribe or a hobgoblin army)* the belongings of 
a single powerful creature that likes to hoard treasure 
(such as a dragon), or the reward bestowed upon a parLy 
after completing a quest for a benefactor* You can also 
split up a treasure hoard so that the adventurers don't 
find or receive it all at once* 

When determining the contents of a hoard belonging 
to one monster, use the table that corresponds to that 
monster s challenge rating. When rolling to determine a 
treasure hoard belonging to a large group of monsters, 
use the challenge rating of the monster that leads the 
group. If the hoard belongs to no one, use the challenge 
rating of the monster that presides over the dungeon 
or lair you are stocking. If the hoard is a gift from a 
benefactor, use the challenge rating equal to the party’s 
average level. 

Every treasure hoard contains a random number of 
coins, as shown at the top of each table. Roll a dlOO and 
consult the table to determine how many gemstones or 
art objects the hoard contains, if any* Use the same roll 
to determine whether the hoard contains magic items* 

As with the individual treasure tables, average values 
are given in parentheses. You can use an average value 
instead of rolling dice to save time. 

If a treasure hoard seems too small, you can roll 
multiple times on the table. Use this approach for 
monsters that are particularly foniger eye (translucent brown with golden center) 

12 Turquoise (opaque light blue-green) 

50 gp Gemstones 

d!2 Stone Description 

1 Bloodstone (opaque dark gray with red flecks) 

2 Carnelian (opaque orange to red-brown) 

3 Chalcedony (opaque white) 

4 Chrysoprase (translucent green) 

5 Citrine (tra nsparent pale yelIow-brown) 

6 Jasper (opaque blue, black, or brown) 

7 Moonstone (translucent white with pale blue glow) 

£ Onyx (opaque bands of black and white, or pure 

black or white) 

9 Quartz (transparent white, smoky gray, or yellow) 

10 Sardonyx (opaque bands of red and white) 

11 Star rose quartz (translucent rosy stone with white 
star-shaped center) 

12 Zircon (transparent pale blue-green) 

100 gp Gemstones 

dIO Stone Description 

1 Amber (transparent watery gold to rich gold) 

2 Amethyst (transparent deep purple) 

3 Chrysoberyl (transparent yellow-green to pale 

green) 

4 Coral (opaque crimson) 

5 Carnet (transparent red, brown-green, or violet) 

6 jade (translucent light green, deep green, or white) 

7 jet (opaque deep black) 

£ Pear! (opaque lustrous white, yellow., or pink) 

9 Spinel (transparent red, red-brown, or deep green) 

10 Tourmaline (transparent pale green, blue, brown, 
or red) 


500 cp Gemstones 


d6 

Stone Description 

1 

Alexandrite (transparent dark green) 

2 

Aquamarine (transparent pale blue-green) 

3 

Black pearlacelet 

4 Cloth-of-gold vestments 

5 Black velvet mask stitched with silver thread 

6 Copper chalice with silver filigree 

7 Pair of engraved bone dice 

8 Small mirror set in a painted wooden frame 

9 Embroidered silk handkerchief 

10 Gold locket with a painted portrait inside 


CHAPTER 7 i TREASURE 












250 gp Art Objects 

dlO Object 

1 Gold ring set with bloodstones 

2 Carved ivory statuette 

3 Large gold bracelet 

4 Silver necklace with a gemstone pendant 

5 Bronze crown 

6 Silk robe with gold embroidery 

7 Large well-made tapestry 

3 Brass mug with jade inlay 

9 Box of turquoise animal figurines 

10 Gold bird cage with eiectrum filigree 

750 gp Art Objects 

dlO Object 

1 Silver chalice set with moonstones 

2 Silver-plated steel longsword with jet set in hilt 

3 Carved harp of exotic wood with ivory inlay and 
zircon gems 

4 Small gold idol 

5 Gold dragon comb set with red garnets as eyes 

6 Bottle stopper cork embossed with gold leaf and 
set with amethysts 

7 Ceremonial eiectrum dagger with a black pearl in 
the pommel 

S Silver and gold brooch 

9 Obsidian statuette with gold fittings and inlay 

10 Painted gold war mask 

2.500 gp Art Objects 
dio object 

1 Fine gold chain set with a fire opal 

2 Old masterpiece painting 

3 Embroidered silk and velvet mantle set with 
numerous moonstones 

4 Platinum bracelet set with a sapphire 

r magic items. Each rarity corresponds 
to character level, as shown in the Magic Item Rarity 
table, A character doesn't typically find a rare magic 
item, for example, until around 5th level. That said, 
rarity shouldn’t get in the way of your campaign’s story. 

If you want a ring of invisibility to fall into the hands of 
a 1 st-level character, so be it. No doubt a great story will 
arise from that event. 

If your campaign allows for trade in magic items, 
rarity can also help you set prices for them. As the DM, 
you determine the value of an individual magic item 
based on its rarity. Suggested values are provided in 
the Magic Item Rarity table. The value of a consumable 
item, such as a potion or scroll, is typically half the value 
of a permanent item of the same rarity. 

Magic Item Rarity 

Rarity Character Level 

Common 1st or higher 

Uncommon 1st or higher 

Rare Sth or higher 

Very rare 11th or higher 

Legendary 17th or higher 

Buying and Selling 

Unless you decide your campaign works otherwise, 
most magic items are so rare that they aren't available 
for purchase. Common items, such as a potion of 
healing, can be procured from an alchemist, herbalist, 
or spellcaster. Doing so is rarely as simple as walking 
into a shop and selecting an Item from a shelf. The seller 
might ask for a service, rather than coin. 

In a large city with an academy of magir own magic 
items, as discussed in chapters 6. 

Identifying a Magic Item 

Some magic items are indistinguishable from their 
non magical counterparts, whereas other magic items 
display their magical nature conspicuously. Whatever a 
magic item’s appearance, handling the item is enough to 
give a character a sense that something is extraordinary 
about it Discovering a magic item’s properties isn + l 
automatic, however. 

The identify spell is the fastest way to reveal an 
item’s properties. Alternatively, a character can focus 
on one magic item during a short rest, while being in 


physical contact with the item. At the end of the rest, the 
character learns the item's properties, as well as how 
to use them. Potions are an exception; a little taste is 
enough to tell the taster what the potion does. 
Sometimes a magic item carries a due to its 
properties. The command word to activate a ring might 
be etched in tiny letters inside it. or a feathered design 
might suggest that its a ring of feather falling. 

Wearing or experimenting with an item can also ofit r 
hints about its properties. For example, if a character 
puts on a ring of jumping, you could say. L+ Your steps fee; 
strangely springy. 1 ’ Perhaps the character then jumps 
up and down to see what happens. You then say the 
character jumps unexpectedly high. 

Variant; More Difficult Identification 

If you prefer magic items to have a greater mystique, 
consider removing the ability to identify the properties 
of a magic item during a short rest, and require the 
identify spell, experimentation, or both to reveal what a 
magic item does. 

Attunement _ 

Some magic items require a creature to form a bond 
with them before their magical properties can be used. 
This bond is called attunement, and certain items 
have a prerequisite for it. If the prerequisite is a class, 
a creature must be a member of that class to attune to 
the item. (If the class is a spellcasting class, a monster 


Individual Treasure: Challenge 0-4 


dlOO 

CP 

SP 

EP 

GP 

PP 

01-30 

566 (17) 

— 

-- 

—- 

— 

31-60 

— 

4d6 (14) 

— 

— 

— 

61-70 

— 


3d6 (10) 

— 

— 

71-95 

-- 

— 

--- 

3d6 (10) 

— 

96-00 

— 

— 

— 1 

-—- 

Id6 (3) 

Individual Treasure: 

Challenge 5-10 




6100 CP 

m AA& v inn n 

SP 

EP 

IJC v I? C\ 

GP 

PP 

U 1 *t u u X 1 UU i 1 ^UUj 

31-60 — 

6 d6x 10 (210) 

I OD X 1U | JT] 

2d6 x 10 (70) 

— 

61-70 

— 

— 

3 d6x 10 (105) 

266 x 10 (70) 

—- 

71-95 

— 

—_ 

— 

4d6x 10 (140) 

— 

96-00 

— 

— 

— 

266 x 10 (70) 

3d6 (10) 

Individual Treasure: 

Challenge 11-16 




dlOO 

CP 

SP 

EP 

CP 

PP 

01-20 

— 

4d6x 100 (1,400) 

■—- 

ld6x 100 (350) 

— 

21-35 

—■ es on Magic Item Table C. 


86-92 

2d4 (5) 25 gp art objects 

Roll 1 d4 times on Magic Item Table F. 


93-97 

2d6 (7) 50 gp gems 

Roll 1 d-4 times on Magic Item Table R 


98-99 

2d4 (5) 25 gp art objects 

Roll once on Magic Item Table G. 


00 

2 d6 (7) 50 gp gems 

Roll once on Magic Item Table G. 



pp 


Treasure Hoard: Challenge 5-10 

CP SP EP CP pp 

Coins 2d6 x 100 (700) 2d6 x l h 000 (7,000) — 666 x 100 (2,100) 3d6xl0(105) 


d 100 

Gems or Art Objects 

Magic Items 

01-04 

— 

— 

05-10 

2 d4 (5) 25 gp art objects 

— 

11-16 

3d6 (10) 50 gp gems 

— 

17-22 

3 d6 (10) 100 gp gems 

— 

23-28 

2d4 (5) 250 gp art objects 

— 

29-32 

2d4 (5) 25 gp art objects 

Roll ld6 times on Magic Item Table A. 



Roll ld6 times on Magic Item Table A. 

Roll ld6 times on Magic Item Table A, 

37-40 

Jdo (1 UJ jU gp ge ms 

3d6 (10) 100 gp gems 

41-44 

2d4 (5) 250 gp art objects 

Roll IdS times on Magic Item Table A, 

45-49 

2d4 (5) 25 gp art objects 

Roll ld4 times on Magic Item Table B, 

50-54 

3d6 (10) 50 gp gems 

Roil ld4 times on Magic Item Table B. 

55-59 

3d6 (10) 100 gp gems 

Roll ld4 times on Magic Item Table B, 

60-63 

2d4 (5) 250 gp art objects 

Roil ld4 times on Magic Item Table B. 

64-66 

2d4 (5) 25 gp art objects 

Roll ld4 times on Magic Item Table C. 

67-69 

3d6 (10) 50 gp gems 

Roll ld4 times on Magic Item Table  the item is cursed. 


Cursed Items _ 

Some magic items bear curses that bedevil their u>- 
sometirnes long after a user has stopped using an he 
A magic items description specifies whether the iter 


EP GP PP 

— 4d6 x 1,000 (14,000) 5d6 x 100 (1,750) p: 


dlOO 

Gems or Art Objects 

Magic Items 

01-03 

-— 

— 

04-06 

2d4 (5) 250 gp art objects 

— 

07-09 

2cJ4 (5) 750 gp art objects 

— 

11-42 

3d6 (10) 500 gp gems 


13-15 

3d6 (10) 1,000 gp gems 

— 

16-19 

2d4 (5) 250 gp art objects 

Roll ld4 times on Magic Item Table A and ld6 times on Magic Item Table B. 

20-23 

2d4 (5) 750 gp art objects 

Roll 1 d4 times on Magic Item Table A and 1 d6 times on Magic Item Table B. 

24-26 

3d6 (10) 500 gp gems 

Roll 1 d4 times on Magic Item Table A and 1d6 times on Magic Item Table B. 

27-29 

3d6 (10) 1,000 gp gems 

Roll 1 d4 times on Magic Item Table A and 1 d6 times on Magic Item Table B. 

30-35 

2d4 (5) 250 gp art objects 

Roil 1 d6 times on Magic Item Table C, 

36-40 

2d4 (5) 750 gp art objects 

Roll ld6 times on Magic Item Table C 

41-45 

3d6 (10) 500 gp gems 

Roll 1 d6 times on PTlagic Item Table C. 

46-50 

3 d 6 (10) 1,000 gp gems 

Roll 1 d6 times on Magic Item Table C. 

51-54 

2d4 (5) 250 gp art objects 

Roll 1d4 times on Magic Item Table D. 

55-58 

2d4 (5) 750 gp art objects 

Roll 1d4 times on Magic Item Table D. 

59-62 

3used again. Its words fade, or it crumbles into dust. 

Any creature that can understand a written language 
can read the arcane script on a scroll and attempt to 
activate it. 


EP - GP PP 

— 12d6 x 1,000 (42,000) 8d6 x 1,000 (28,000) 


3d6 (10) 1,000 gp gems 
IdlO (5) 2,500 gp art objects 
ld4 (2) 7,500 gp art objects 
ld8 (4) 5,000 gp gems 
3d6 (10) 1,000 gp gems 
IdlO (5) 2,500 gp art objects 
ld4 (2) 7,500 gp art objects 
IdS (4) 5,000 gp gems 
3d6 (10) 1,000 gp gems 


Roll ld8 


3d6 (10) 1 3 000 gp gems 
IdlO (5) 2,500 gp art objects 
ld4 (2) 7,500 gp art objects 
ld8 (4) 5,000 gp gems 


Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Ro 

Roi 


ids 

ld8 
1d8 
ld6 
ld6 
1d6 
1 d 6 
Id 6 
ld6 
ids 
ld6 
ld4 
ld4 
ld4 
ld4 
ld4 
ld4 
ld4 
1d4 
ld4 
ld4 
ld4 
Id4 


times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 
times on 


Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 

Mag 


c Item Table C. 
c Item Table C. 
c Item Table C. 
c Item Table C 
c Item Table D. 
c Item Table D. 
c Item Table D. 
c Item Table D. 
c Item Table E, 
c Item Table E potions together, you can 
roll on the Potion Miscibility table. If more than two are 
combined, roll again for each subsequent potion, combining 
the results. Unless the effects are immediately obvious, 
reveal them only when they become evident. 

Potion Miscibility 

dlOO Result 

01 The mixture creates a magical explosion, 

dealing 6dl0 force damage to the mixer and 
ldlO force damage to each creature within 5 
feet of the mixer. 

02-08 The mixture becomes an ingested poison of 
the DM’s choice. 

09-15 Both potions lose their effects. 

16-25 One potion loses its effect. 

26-35 Both potions work, but with their numerical 
effects and durations halved. A potion has no 
effect if it can’t be halved in this way. 

36-90 Both potions work normally. 

91-99 The numerical effects and duration of one 
potion are doubled. If neither potion has 
anything to double in this way, they work 
normally. 

00 Only one potion works, but its effect is 

permanent. Choose the simplest effect to 
make permanent, or the one that seems 
the most fun. For example, a potion of 
healing might increase the drinker’s hit point 
maximum by 4, or oil of etherealness might 
permanently trap the user in the Ethereal 
Plane. At your discretion, an appropriate 
spell, such as dispel magic or remove curse , 
might end this lasting effect. 

» ■ . — i. i 


longbow. If a magic weapon doesn't on the Scroll Mishap table. 

Scroll Mishap 

d6 Result 

1 A surge of magical energy deals the caster ld6 
force damage per level of the spell. 

2 The spell affects the caster or an ally 
(determined randomly) instead of the intended 
target, or it affects a random target nearby if the 
caster was the intended target. 

3 The spell affects a random location within the 
spell’s range. 

4 The spell’s effect is contrary to its normal one, 
but neither harmful nor beneficial. For instance, 
a fireball might produce an area of harmless 
cold. 

5 The caster suffers a minor but bizarre effect 
related to the spell. Such effects last only 
as long as the original spell's duration, or 
ldlO minutes for spells that take effect 
instantaneously. For example, a fireball might 
cause smoke to billow from the caster’s ears for 
ldlO minutes. 

6 The spell activates after 1 dl 2 hours. If the 
caster was the intended target, the spell takes 
effect normally. If the caster was not the 
intended target, the spell goes off in the general 
direction of the intended target, up to the spell’s 

maximum range, if the target has moved away. 

^- W 


CHAPTKR 7 | TREASURE 















Dwarves might make items usable only by dwarf-sized 
and dwarf-shaped characters. 

When a nonhumanoid tries to wear an item, use your 
discretion as to whether the item functions as intended, 
A ring placor phrase that must be 
>poken for an item to work* A magic item that requires 
a command word can’t be activated in an area where 
Hound is prevented* as in the area of the silence spell. 

Consumables 

Some items are used up when they are activated* A 
potion or an elixir must be swallowed, or an oil applied 
the body. The writing vanishes from a scroll when it is 
read. Once used, a consumable item loses us magic. 


Magic Item Formulas 


4 magic item formula explains how to make a particular 
magic item. Such a formula can be an excellent reward if you 
allow player characters to craft magic items, as explained in 
chapter 6, "Between Adventures,” 

You can award a formula in place of a magic item. Usually 
.vntten in a book or on a scroll, a formula rs one step rarer 
than the item it allows a character to create. For example, 
the formula for a common magic item 1 is uncommon* No 
formulas exist for legendary items. 

If the creation of magic items is commonplace in your 
campaign, a formula can have a rarity that matches the 
rarity of the item it allows a character to create. Formulas for 
common and uncommon items might even be for sale, each 
with a cost double that of its magic item. 


Spells 

Some magic items allow the user to cast a spell from 
the item. The spell is cast at the lowest possible spell 
level, doesn't expend any of the user's spell slots* andrable as a non magical item of its kind. Most magic 
items, other than potions and scrolls, have resistance 
to all damage. Artifacts are practically indestructible, 
requiring extraordinary measures to destroy* 

Special Features 


You can add distinctiveness to a magic item by thinking 
about its backstory. Who made the item? Is anything 
unusual about its construction? Why was it made, and 
how was it originally used? What minor magical quirks 
set it apart from other items of its kind? Answering 
these questions can help turn a generic magic item, 
such as a +1 longsword, into a more flavorful discovery. 

T he tables that follow can help you come up with 
answers. Roll on as many of these tables as you like. 
Some of the table entries make more sense for certain 
items than for others* Some magic items are made 
only by certain kinds of creatures, for instance: a cloak 
of elvenkind is made by elves, rather than dwarves* If 
you roll something that doesn’t make sense, roll again, 
choose a more appropriate entry, or use the rolled detail 
as inspiration to make up your own. 


Variant: Wands That Don't Recharge 


A typical wand has expendable charges. If you’d like wands to 
be a limited resource, you can make some of them incapable 
of regaining charges. Consider increasing the base number of 
charges in such a wand, to a maximum of 25 charges* These 
charges are neit's made of fabric, it is 
diaphanous. 

II Elemental Earth. This item might be crafted from 
stone. Any cloth or feather elements are studded 
with finely polished rock. 


d20 Creator or Intended User 

12 Elemental Fire. This item is warm to the touch 
and any metal parts are crafted from bfack iro" 
Sigils of flames cover its surface. Shades of re: 
orange are the prominent colors, 

13 Elemental Water. Lustrous fish scales replace 
leather or cloth on this item, and metal portion 
are instead crafted from seashells and workec :: 
as hard as any metal, 

14-15 Elf. The item is half the normal weight. It is 

adorned with symbols of nature: leaves, vines 
stars, and the like. 

16 Fey. The item is exquisitely crafted from the 
finest materials and glows with a pale radiance i* 
moonlight, shedding dim light in a 5-foot radius. 
Any metal in the item is silver or mithral, rathe" 
than iron or steel. 

17 Fiend. The item is made of black iron or horn 
inscribed with runes, and any doth or leather 
components are crafted from the hide offer:.: 
is warm to the touch and features leering face: 
vile runes engraved on its surface. Celestials ; 
the item’s presence repulsive. 

18 Giant, The item is larger than normal and wa: 
crafted by giants for use by their smaller allies 

19 Gnome, The item is crafted to appear ordina 
it might look worn. It could also incorporate 
and mecm for themselves, or ceiel 
its use by a cleric or paladin of the same deity 

7 Sinister* This item is linked to a deed of great e 
such as a massacre or an assassination. It m . 

h 

have a name or be closely associated with a ■. = 
who used it. Anyone familiar with the item's h : 
is likely to treat it and its owner with suspicion 
S Symbol of Power. This item was once used as 
of royal regalia or as a badge of high office. Its 
former owner or that person’s descendants it- 
desire it, or someone might mistakenly ass urn: ? 
new owner is the item's legitimate inheritor. 




CHAPTER 7 




TREASURE 













What Minor Property Does It Have? 

d20 Minor Property 

1 Beacon. The bearer can use a bonus action to 
cause the item to shed bright fight in a 10-foot 
radius and dim light for an additional 10 feet, or to 
extinguish the light. 

2 Compass. The wieider can use an action to learn 
which way is north. 

3 Conscientious. When the bearer of this item 
contemplates or undertakes a malevolent act, the 
item enhances pangs of conscience. 

4 Delver, While underground, the bearer of this item 
always knows the item’s depth below the surface 
and the direction to the nearest staircase, ramp, or 
other path leading upward, 

5 Gleaming, This item never gets dirty. 

6 Guardian, The item whispers warnings to its 
bearer, granting a +2 bonus to initiative if the 
bearoud. The item makes a loud noise—such as a 
clang, a shout, or a resonating gong—when used. 


d20 Minor Property 

12 Song Craft, Whenever this item is struck or is used 
to strike a foe, its bearer hears a fragment of an 
ancient song. 

13 Strange Material. The item was created from 

a material that is bizarre given its purpose. Its 
durability is unaffected, 

14 Temperate* The bearer suffers no harm in 
temperatures as cold as -20 degrees Fahrenheit or 
as warm as 120 degrees Fahrenheit. 

15 Unbreakable, The item can't be broken. Special 
means must be used to destroy it. 

16 War Leader. The bearer can use an action to cause 
his or her voice to carry dearly for up to 300 feet 
until the end of the bearer's next turn. 

17 Waterborne. This item floats on water and other 
liquids. Its bearer has advantage on Strength 
(Athletics) checks to swim, 

13 Wicked* When the bearer is presented with an 
opportunity to act in a selfish or malevolent way, 
the item heightens the bearer's urge to do so, 

19 Illusion. The item is imbued with illusion magic, 
allowing its bearer to alter the item’s appearance in 
minor ways. Such alterations don't change how the 
item is worn, carried, or wielded, and they have no 
effect on its other magical properties. For example, 
the wearer could make a red robe appear blue, or 
make a gold ring look like it's made of ivory. The 
item rev 

Spell scroll (cantrip) 

61-70 

Potion of climbing 

—■ 

i 

O 

Spell scroti (1st level) 

91-94 

Spell scroll (2nd level) 

93-98 

Potion of greater heating 

99 

Bag of holding 

GO 

Driftglobe 

Magic Item Table B 

dl00 

Magic Item 

01-15 

Potion of greater healing 

16-22 

Potion of fire breath 

23-29 

Potion of resistance 

30-34 

Ammunition, +1 

35-39 

Potion of animal friendship 

40-44 

Potion of hill giant strength 

45-49 

Potion of growth 

50-54 

Potion of water breathing 

55-59 

Spell scroll (2nd level) 

60-64 

Spell scroll (3rd level) 

65-67 

Bag of holding 

68-70 

KeoghfonVs ointment 

71-73 

Oil of slipperiness 

74-75 

Dust of disappearance 

76-77 

Dust of dryness 

78-79 

Dust of sneezing and choking 

80-81 

Elemental gem 

82-83 

Philter of love 

84 

Alchemy jug 

S5 

Cap of water breathing 

86 

Cloak of the manta ray 

87 

Driftglobe 

88 

Goggles of night 

89 

Helm of comprehending languages 

90 

Immovable rod 

91 

Lantern of revealing 

92 

Mariner's armor 

93 

Mithral armor 

94 

Potion of poison 

95 

Ring of swimming 

96 

Robe of useful items 

97 

h. 

Rope of climbing 

98 

Saddle of the cavalier 

99 

Wand of magic detection 

00 

Wand of secrets 



















Magic Item Table C 


dlOO 

Magic Item 

01-15 

Potion of superior healing 

16-22 

Spell scroll (4th level) 

23-27 

Ammunition, +2 

28-32 

Potion of clairvoyance 

33-37 

Potion of diminution 

38-42 

Potion of gaseous for m 

43-47 

Potion of frost giant strength 

48-52 

Potion of stone giant strength 

53-57 

Potion of heroism 

58-62 

Potion of invulnerability 

63-67 

Potion of mind reading 

68-72 

Spell scroll (Sth level) 

73-75 

EEixi r of health 

76-78 

Oil of ethereal ness 

79-81 

Potion of fire giant strength 

82-84 

Quaal’s feather token 

85-87 

Scroll of protection 

88-89 

Bag of beans 

90-91 

Bead of force 

92 

Chime of opening 

93 

Decanter of endless water 

94 

Eyes of minute seeing 

95 

Folding boat 

96 

Reward's handy haversack 

97 

Horseshoes of speed 

98 

Necklace of fireballs 

99 

Periapt of health 

00 

Sending stones 


Magic Item Table D 


dlOO 

Magic Item 

01-20 

Potion of supreme healing 

21-30 

Potion of invisibility 

o 

( 

rn 

Potion of speed 

41-50 

Spell scroll (6th level) 

51-57 

Spell scroll (7th level) 

58-62 

Ammunition, +3 

63-67 

Oil of sharpness 

68-72 

Potion of flying 

73-77 

Potion of cloud giant strength 

78-82 

Potion of longevity 

83-87 

Potion of vitality 

88-92 

Spell scroll (Sth level) 

93-95 

Horseshoes of a zephyr 

96-98 

Nolzur's marvelous pigments 

99 

Bag of devouring 

00 

Portable hole 


Magic Item Table E 

dlOO Magic Item 
01-30 Spell scroll (Sth level) 

31c-Fuimidh cittern) 

50-51 

Staff of the adder 

88 

Medallion of thoughts 

52-53 

Staff of the python 

89 

Necklace of adaptation 

54-55 

Sword of vengeance 

90 

Periapt ofwound closure 

56-57 

Trident offish command 

91 

Pipes of haunting 

58-59 

Wand of magic missiles 

92 

Pipes of the sewers 

60-61 

Wand of the war mage, +1 

93 

Ring of jumping 

62-63 

Wand of web 

94 

Ring of mind shielding 

64-65 

Weapon of warning 

95 

Ring of warmth 

66 

Adamantine armor (chain mail) 

96 

Ring of water walking 

67 

Adamantine armor (chain shirt) 

97 

Quiver of Ehlonna 

68 

Adamantine armor (scale mail) 

93 

Stone of good luck 

69 

Bag of tricks (gray) 

99 

Wind fan 

70 

Bag of tricks (rust) 

00 

Winged boots 



Bracers of 
Archery 


■'7rV- ••■■**" ,Vr '" -'A 


Fochlucan 

Bandore 




Arrow of Slaving 


CHAPTER 7 I TREASURE 





































































Magic Item Table C 


dlOG 

Magic Item 

dlOO 

Magic Item 

01-11 

Weapon, +2 

54 

loun stone (sustenance) 

12-14 

Figurine of wondrous power (roll dS) 

55 

Iron bands of Bilarro 


1 Bronze griffon 

56 

Armor, +1 leather 


2 Ebony fly 

57 

Armor of resistance (leather) 


3 Golden lions 

58 

Mace of disruption 


4 Ivory goats 

59 

Mace of smiting 


5 Marble elephant 

60 

Mace of terror 


6-7 Onyx dog 

61 

Mantant fortress 

85 

Staff of withering 

38 

Dagger of venom 

86 

Stone of controlling earth elemental 

39 

Dimensional shackles 

87 

Sun blade 

40 

Dragon slayer 

88 

Sword of life stealing 

41 

Elven chain 

89 

Sword of wounding 

42 

Flame tongue 

90 

Tentacle rod 

43 

Gem of seeing 

91 

Vicious weapon 

44 

Giant slayer 

92 

Wand of binding 

45 

Glamoured studded leather 

93 

Wand of enemy detection 

46 

Helm of teleportation 

94 

Wand of fear 

47 

Horn of blasting 

95 

Wand of fireballs 

48 

Horn of Valhalla (silver or brass) 

96 

Wand of lightning bolts 

49 

Instrument of the bards (Canaith mandolin) 

97 

Wand of paralysis 

50 

Instrument of the bards (Cti lyre) 

98 

Wand of the war mage, +2 

51 

loun stone (awareness) 

99 

Wand of wonder 

52 

loun stone (protection) 

00 

Wings of flying 

53 

loun stone (reserve) 


















dn oo 
66 

67 

68 

69 

70 

71 

72 

73 

74 

75 

76 

77 

78 

79 

80 
81 
82 

83 

84 

85 

86 

87 

88 

89 

90 

91 

92 

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98 

99 
00 


Magk Item 
Dancing sword 
Demon armor 
Dragon scale mail 
Dwarven plate 
Dwarven thrower 
Efreeti bottle 

Figurine of wondrous power (obsidian steed) 

Frost brand 

Helm of brilliance 

Horn of Valhalla (bronze) 

Instrument of the bards (Anstruth harp) 

loun stone (absorption) 

loun stone (agility) 

loun

Belt of fire giant strength 

59 

Belt of frost (or stone) giant stren 

60 

Armor, -rl breastplate 

61 

Armor of resistance (breastplate) 

62 

Candle of invocation 

63 

Armor, +2 chain mail 

64 

Armor, +2 chain shirt 

65 

Cloak of arachnida 


Manual of 
Iron Golems 





























CHAPTER 7 I TREASURE 


Belt of Storm 
Giant Strength 


dlOO 

Magic Item 

77 

Apparatus of Kwalish 

78 

Armor of invulnerability 

79 

Belt of storm giant strength 

SO 

Cubic gate 

81 

Deck of many things 

82 

Efreeti chain 

83 

Armor of resistance (half plate) 

84 

Horn of Valhalla (iron) 

85 

Instrument of the bards (Gllamh harp) 

86 

loun stone (greater absorption) 

87 

loun stone (mastery) 

88 

loun stone (regeneration) 

89 

Plate armor of etherealness 

90 

Plate armor of resistance 

91 

Ring of air elemental command 

92 

Ring of earth elemental command 

93 

Ring of fire elemental command 

94 

Ring of three wishes 

95 

Ring of water elemental command 

96 

Sphere of annihilation 

97 

Talisman of pure good 

98 

Talisman of the sphere 

99 

Talisman of ultimate evil 

00 

Tome of the stilled tongue 


Magic Item Table I 


dlOO 

Magic Item 

01-05 

Defender 

06-10 

Hammer of thunderbolts 

11-15 

Luck blade 

16-20 

Sword of answering 

21-23 

Holy avenger 

24 “2 6 

Ring of djinni summoning 

27-29 

Ring of invisitical hit against you becomes a 
normal hit. 

AlchemyJug 


Ammunition, +1, +2, or +3 

Weapon (any ammunition), uncommon (+!)< rare (+2), or 
very rare (+3) 

You have a bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this piece of magic ammunition. The bonus is 
determined by the rarity of the ammunition. Once it hits 
a target, the ammunition is no longer magical. 

Amulet of Health 

Wondrous item , rare (requires attunement) 

Your Constitution score is 19 while you wear this 
amulet. It has no effect on you if your Constitution is 
already 19 or higher. 


Amulet of the 


Wondrous item, uncommon 

This ceramic jug appears to be able to hold a gallon 
of liquid and weighs 12 pounds whether full or empty. 
Sloshing sounds can be heard from within the jug when 
it is shaken, even if the jug is empty. 

You can use an action and name one liquid from the 
table below to cause the jug to produce the chosen 
liquid. Afterward, you can uncork the jug as an action 
and pour that liquid out t up to 2 gallons per minute. The 
maximum amount of liquid the jug can produce depends 
on the liquid you named. 

Once the jug starts producing a liquid, it can t produce 
a different one, or more of one that has reached its 
maximum, until the next dawn. 


Liquid 

Max Amount 

Liquid 

Max Amount 

Acid 

8 ounces 

Oil 

1 quart 

Basic poison 

1/2 ounce 

Vinegar 

2 gallons 

Beer 

4 ga hours of breathing, divided by the 
number of breathing creatures inside. 

The apparatus floats on water. It can also go 
underwater to a depth of 900 feet. Below that, the 
vehicle takes 2d6 bludgeoning damage per minute 
from pressure. 


APPARATUS OF KWALISH LEVERS 

Lever Up Down 


1 Legs and tail extend, 
allowing the apparatus to 
walk and swim. 

2 Forward window shutter 
opens, 

3 Side window shutters 
open (two per side), 

4 Two claws extend from 
the front sides of the 
apparatus, 

5 Each extended daw 
makes the following 
melee weapon attack: 

+8 to hit, reach 5 ft,, 
one target. Hit: 7 (2d6) 
bludgeoning damage, 

6 The apparatus walks or 
swims forward. 

7 The apparatus turns 90 
degrees left. 

S Eyelike fixtures emit 

bright light in a 30-foot 
radius and dim light for 
an additional 30 feet, 

9 The apparatus sinks as 
much as 20 feet in liquid. 

10 The rear hatch unseals 
and opens. 


Legs and tail retract, 
reducing the apparatus's 
speed to 0 and making 
it unable to benefit from 
bonuses to speed. 
Forward window shutter 
doses. 

Side window shutters 
close (two per side). 

The claws retract. 

Each extended daw 
makes the following 
melee weapon attack: 

+8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: The target is 
grappled (escape DC 15}. 
The apparatus walks or 
swims backward. 

The apparatus turns 90 
degrees right. 

The light turns off, 


The apparatus rises up to 
20 feet in liquid. 

The rear hatch doses 
and seals. 


CHAPTER 7 I TREASURE 














AfiMon of 
Cold Resistance 



Armor, +1, +2, or +3 

Armor (light medium, or heavy), rare (+1), very rare (+2), 
or legendary (+3) 

You have a bonus to AC while wearing this armor* The 
bonus is determined by its rarity. 


Armor of Invulnerability 

Armor (plate), legcndary (requires attunement) 


You have resistance to non magical damage while you 
wear this armor Additionally, you can use an action to 
make yourself immune to nonmagical damage for 10 
minutes or until you are no longer wearing the armor 
Once this special action is used, it can't be used again 
until the next dawn. 


Armor of Resistance 

Armor (light, medium, or heavy), rare (requires 
at tunement) 


You have resistance to one type of damage while 
you wear this armor. The DM chooses the type or 
determines it randomly from the options below. 


dlO Damage Type 

1 Acid 

2 Cold 

3 Fire 

4 Force 

5 Lightning 


dlO Damage Type 

6 Necrotic 

7 Poison 

8 Psychic 

9 Radiant 

10 Thunder 


Armor of Vulnerability 
Armor (plate), rare (requires attunement) 

While wearing this armor, you have resistance to one 
of the following damage types: bludgeoning, piercing, 
or slashing. The DM chooses the type or determines 
it randomly. 

Curse. This armor is cursed, a fact that is revealed 
ogic ammunition of this kind exist, 
such as bolts of slaying meant for a crossbow, though 
arrows are most common. 

Bag of Beans 
Wondrous item, rare 

Inside this heavy cloth bag are 3d4 dry beans. The 
bag weigtfe 1/2 pound plus 1/4 pound for each bean 
it contains* 

If you dump the bag's contents out on the ground, they 
explode in a 10-foot radius, extending from the beans. 
Each creature in the area, including you, must make a 
DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 5d4 fire damage 
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful 
one* The fire ignites flammable objects in the area that 
aren't being worn or carried. 

If you remove a bean from the bag. plant at in dirt or 
sand, and then water it, the bean produces an effect 
1 minute later from the ground where it was planted. 

The DM can choose an effect from the following table, 
determine it randomlv. or create an effect. 


CHAPTER 7 ! TREASURE 









Sag op Holoim# 


dlOO Effect 

01 5d4 toadstools sprout. If a. creature eats a 

toadstool, roll any die. On an odd roll, the eater 
must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution, saving 
throw or take 5d6 poison damage and become 
poisoned for 1 hour. On an even roll, the eater 
gains Sd6 temporary hit points for 1 hour. 

□2—10 A geyser erupts and spouts water, beer, berry juice, 
tea, vinegar, wine, or oil (DM's choice) 30 feet into 
the air for ld!2 rounds.uccessful save, a creature 
permanently increases its lowest ability score by 1, 
randomly choosing among equally low scores. On 
a failed save, the creature takes 1 Od6 force damage 
from an internal magical explosion. 

91-99 A pyramid with a 60-foot-square base bursts 
upward. Inside is a sarcophagus containing 
a mummy lord (see the Monster Manual for 
statistics). The pyramid is treated as the mummy 
lord's lair, and its sarcophagus contains treasure of 
the DM's choice. 

00 A giant beanstalk sprouts, growing to a height 
of the DM's choice. The top leads where the DM 
chooses, such as to a great view, a cloud giant's 
castle, or a different plane of existence. 



Bag of 
Devouring 


Bag of Devouring 
Wondrous item „ very rare 


This bag superficially resembles a bag of holding but is a 
feeding orifice fora gigantic extradimensional creature. 

Turning the bag inside out closes the orifice. 

The extradimensional creature attached to the bag 
can sense whatever is placed inside the bag. Animal or 
vegetable matter placed wholly in the bag is devoured 
and lost forever. When part of a living creature is placed 
in the bag, as happens when someone reaches inside it. 
there is a 50 percent chance that the creature is pulled 
inside the bag. A creature inside the bag can use its 
action to try to escape with a successful DC 15 Strength 
cheek. Another creature can use idS 

Creature 

1 

Rat 

5 

Giant goat 

2 

Owl 

Mastiff 

6 

Giant boar 

3 

7 

Lion 

4 

Goat 

S 

Brown bear 

Tan Bag of Tricks 



dS 

Creature 

dS 

Creature 

i 

jackal 

5 

Black bear 

2 

Ape 

6 

Giant weasel 

3 

Baboon 

7 

Giant hyena 

4 

Axe beak 

S 

Tiger 


Bead of Force 

Wondrous item, rare 

This small black sphere measures 3/4 of an inch in 
diameter and weighs an ounce. Typically, td4 + 4 beads 
offeree are found together. 

You can use an action to throw the bead up to 60 
feet. The bead explodes on impact and is destroyed. 
Each creature within a 10-foot radius of where the bead 
landed must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw 
or take 5d4 force damage. A sphere of transparent 
force then encloses the area for 1 minute. Any creature 
that failed the save and is completely within the area is 
trapped inside this sphere. Creatures that succeeded 
on the save, or are partially within the area, are pushed 


CHAPTER 7 I TREASURE 


Bag of Tricks 

Wondrous item, uncommon 


This ordinary bag, made from gray, rust, or tan cloth, 
appears empty Reaching inside the bag, however, 
reveals the presence of a small, fuzzy object. The bag 
weighs 1/2 pound. 

You can use an action to pull the fuzzy object from the 
bag and throw it up to 20 feet. When the object lands, 
it transforms into a creature you determine by rolling 
a d8 and consulbelt of frost giant 
strength look different but they have the same effect* 



Boots of 
Elvenkind 


away from the center of the sphere until they are no 
longer inside it. Only breathable air can pass through 
:he sphere’s wall. No attack or other effect can. 

An enclosed creature can use its action to push 
against the sphere's wail, moving the sphere up to half 
■he creature's walking speed. The sphere can be picked 
up, and its magic causes it to weigh only 1 pound, 
regardless of the weight of creatures inside. 

Belt of Dwarvenkind 


Type 

Strength 

Rarity 

Hifl giant 

21 

Rare 

Stone/frost giant 

23 

Very rare 

Fire giant 

25 

Very rare 

Cloud giant 

27 

Legendary 

Storm giant 

29 

Legendary 


Berserker Axe 

Weapon (any axe), rare (requires attunement) 

You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. In addition, while you are 
attuned to this weapon, your hit point maximum 
increases by 1 for each level you have attained. 

Curse . This axe is cursed, and becoming attuned to it 
extends the curse to you* As long as you remain cursed, 
you are unwilling to part with the axe, keeping it within 
reach at all times* You also have disadvantage on attack 
rolls with weapons other than this one, unless no foe is 
within 60 feet of you that you can see or hear. 

Whenever a hostile creature damages you while the 
axe is in your possession* you must succeed on a DC 15 
Wisdom saving throw or go berserk* While berserk, you 
must use your action each round to attack the creature 
nearest to you with the axe. If you can make extra 
attacks as part of the Attack action, you use those extra 
attacks, moving to attack the next nearest creature after 
you fell your current target. If you have multiple possible 
targets, you attack one at random* You are berserk until 
you start your turn with no creatures within 60 feet of 
you that you can see or hear. 


Wondrous item, rare (requires attunement) 

W hile wearing this belL. you gain the follow ing benefits: 

- Your Constitution score increases by 2* to a 
maximum of 20* 

' You have advantage on Charisma (Persuasion) checks 
made to interact with dwarves. 

In addition, while attuned to the belt, you have a 50 
percent chance each day at dawn of grow ing a full beard 
if you're capable of growing one, or a visibly thicker 
beard if you already have one. 

If you aren’t a dwarf, you gain the following additional 
benefits while wearing the belt: 

- You have advantage on saving throws against poison, 
and you have resistance against poison damage. 

* You have darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. 

* You can speak* read, and w rite Dwarvish, 

Belt of Giant Strength 

Wondrous item, rarity varies (requires attunement) 

While wearing this belt* youeed 
becomes 30 feet* unless your walking speed is higher, 
and your speed isn't reduced if you are encumbered 
or wearing heavy armor. In addition* you can jump 
three times the normal distance, though you can’t jump 
farther than your remaining movement would allow. 

Boots of the Winterlands 

Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement) 

These furred boots are snug and feel quite warm* While 
you wear them* you gain the following benefits; 

* You have resistance to cold damage* 

* You ignore difficult terrain created by ice or snow. 

- You can tolerate temperatures as low as —50 degrees 
Fahrenheit without any additional protection. If you 
wear heavy clothes, you can tolerate temperatures as 
low as -100 degrees Fahrenheit* 

Bowl of Commanding Water Elementals 

Wondrous item t rare 

While this bowl is filled with water, you can use an 
action to speak the bowl's command word and summon 
a water elemental, as if you had cast the conjure 
elemental spell* The bowl can't be used this way again 
until the next dawn. 

The bowl is about 1 foot in diameter and half as deep. 
It weighs 3 pounds and holds about 3 gallons. 

Bracers of Archery 

Wondrous item , uncommon (requires attunement) 

While wearing these bracers, you have proficiency 
with the longbow and shortbow* and you gain a +2 
bonus to damage rolls on ranged attacks made with 
such weapons. 


Boots of td word, provided that the broom 
is still within 1 mile of you. 


CHAPTER 7 ; TREASURE 
























Boors of Strip ng 
and Springing 


Mountebank 


Candle of Invocation 

Wondrous item. very rare (requires attunemein) 

This slender taper is dedicated to a deity and shares 
that deity's alignment. The candle’s alignment can 
be detected with the detect evil and good spell The 
DM chooses the god and associated alignment or 
determines the alignment randomly. 


d2Q 

Alignment 

d20 

Alignment 

1-2 

Chaotic evil 

10-11 

Neutral 

3-4 

Chaotic neutral 

12-13 

Neutral good 

5-7 

Chaotic good 

14-15 

Lawful evil 

8-9 

Neutral evil 

16-17 

18-20 

Lawful neutral 
Lawful good 


The candle’s magic is activated when the candle is lit, 
which requires an action. After burning for 4 hours, the 
candle is destroyed. You can snuff it out early for use at 
a later time. Deduct the ti me it burned in increments of 
1 minute from the candle's total burn time. 

While lit, the candle sheds dim light in a 30-foot 
radius. Any creature within that light whose alignment 
matches that of the candle makes attack rolls, saving 
throws, and ability checks with advantage. In addition, a 
cleric or druid in the light whose alignment matches the 
candle’s can cast Ist-level spells he or she has prepared 
without expending spell slots, though the spells effect is 
at randomly. 


dlOO 

Size 

Capacity 

Flying Speed 

01-20 

3 ft. x 5 ft. 

200 lb. 

SO feet 

21-55 

4 ft. x 6 ft. 

400 lb. 

60 feet 

56-80 

5 ft. x 7 ft. 

600 lb. 

40 feet 

81-100 

6 ft, x 9 ft. 

800 lb. 

30 feet 


A carpet can carry up to twice the weight shown on 
the table, but it flies at half speed if it carries more than 
its normal capacity. 


15 7 



CHAPTER 7 I TREASURE 












Censer of Controlling Air Elementals 

Wondrous item, rare 

While incense is burning in this censer, you can use 
an action to speak the censer's command word and 
summon an air elemental, as if you had cast the conjure 
elemental spell. The censer can't be used this way again 
until the next dawn. 

This 6-inch-wide, 1-foot-high vessel resembles a 
chalice with a decorated lid* It weighs 1 pound. 

Chime of Opening 
Wondrous item, rare 

This hollow metal tube measures about I foot long and 
weighs I pound. You can strike it as an action, pointing 
it at an object within 120 feet of you that can be opened, 
such as a door, lid, or lock. The chime issues a clear 
tone, and one lock or latch on the object opens unless 
the sound can't reach the object* If no locks or latches 
remain, the object itself opens. 

The chime can be used ten times. After the tenth time, 
it cracks and becomes useless. 

Circlet of Blasting 

Wondrous item * uncommon 

While wearing this circlerwise 
unable to move. 

Cloak of Elvenkind 

Wondrous item , uncommon (requires attunement) 

While you wear this cloak with its hood up* Wisdom 
(Perception) checks made to see you have disadvantage* 
and you have advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks 
made to hide, as the cloak s color shifts to camouflage 
you. Pulling the hood up or down requires an action. 

Cloak of Invisibility 

Wondrous item , legendary (requires attunement) 

While wearing this cloak, you can pull its hood over 
your head to cause yourself to become invisible* While 
you are invisible, anything you are carrying or wearing 
is invisible with you. You become visible when you cease 
wearing the hood. Pulling the hood up or down requires 
an action. 


Cloak of Elvenkind 




Cloak of 
Protection 















Ch IMF OF 

Opening 


Deduct the time you are invisible, in increments of 1 
minute, from the cloak's maximum duration of 2 hours. 
After 2 hours of use* the cloak ceases to function. For 
every uninterrupted period of 12 hours the cloak goes 
unused, it regains 1 hour of duration. 

Cloak of Protection 

1 Vondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement) 

You gain a +1 bonus to AC and saving throws while you 
wear this cloak. 

Cloak of the Bat 
1 Vondrous item, rare (requires attunement) 

While wearing this cloak, you have advantage on 
Dexterity (Stealth) checks. In an area of dim light or 
o maintain 
it during its duration, but it ends if scrying ends. 

Crystal Bail of Telepathy. While scrying with the 
crystal ball, you can communicate telepathic ally with 
creatures you can see within 30 feet of the spell's 
sensor You can also use an action to cast the suggestion 
spell (save DC 17) through the sensor on one of those 
creatures. You don't need to concentrate on this 
suggestion to maintain it during its duration, but it ends 
if scrying ends. Once used, the suggestion power of the 
crystal ball can't be used again until the next dawn. 

Crystal Ball of True Seeing. While scrying with the 
crystal ball, you have truesight with a radius of 120 feet 
centered on the spell's sensor. 


Cure of Force 

Wondrous item , rare (requires attunement) 

This cube is about an inch across. Each face has a 
distinct marking on it that can be pressed. The cube 
starts with 36 charges, and it regains Id20 expended 
charges daily at dawn. 

You can use an action to press one of the cube's faces, 
expending a number of charges based on the chosen 
face, as shown in the Cube of Force Faces table. Each 












Cubic Gate 

Wondrous item, legendary 

This cube is 3 inches across and radiates palpable 
magical energy. The six sides of the cube are each 
keyed to a different plane of existence, one of which is 
the Material Plane. The other sides are linked to plane- 
determined by the DM. 

You can use an action to press one side of the cube tc 
cast the gate spell with it, opening a portal to the plane 
keyed to that side. Alternatively, if you use an action to 
press one side twice, you can cast the plane shift spell 
(save DC 17) with the cube and transport the targets to 
the plane keyed to that side. 

The cube has 3 charges. Each use of the cube expends 
1 charge. The cube regains ld3 expended charges 
daily at dawn, 

Daern’s Instant Fortress 

Wondrous item, rare 

You can use an action to place this ldnch metal cube 
on the ground and speak its command word. The cube 
rapidly grows into a fortress that remains until you use 
an action to speak the command word that dismisses it. 
which works only if the fortress is empty. 

The fortress is a square tower, 20 feet on a side 
and 30 feet high, with arrow slits on all sides and a 
battlement atop it. Its interior is divided into two floors, 
with a ladder running along one wall to connect them. 
The ladder ends at a trapdoor leading to the roof. When 
activated, the tower has a small door on the side facing 
you. The door opens only at your command, which 
you can speak as a bonus action, h is immune to the 
knock spell and similar magic, such as that of a chime 
of opening. 

Each creature in the area where the fortress appears 
must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 
lOdlO bludgings can pass 

through at your discretion. 

6 0 The barrier deactivates. 

The cube loses charges when the barrier is targeted 
by certain spells or comes into contact with certain spell 
or magic item effects, as shown in the table below. 

Spell or Item Charges Lost 

Disintegrate ld!2 

Horn of blasting IdlG 

Passwall ld6 

Prismatic spray ld20 

Wall office ld4 


CHAPTER 7 TREASURE 


Lbo 



















Dancing Sword 

Weapon (any sword), very rare (requires attunement) 

You can use a bonus action to toss this magic sword into 
the air and speak the command word. When you do so, 

■ he sword begins to hover, flies up to 30 feet, and attacks 
:me creature of your choice within 5 feet of it. The 
sword uses your attack roll and ability score modifier to 
damage rolls. 

While the sword hovers, you can use a bonus action to 
cause it to fly up to 30 feet to another spot within 30 feet 
cf you. As part of the same bonus action, you can cause 
the sword to attack one creature within 5 feet of it. 

After the hovering sword attacks for the fourth time, it 
dies up to 30 feet and tries to return to your hand. If you 
have no hand free, it falls to the ground at your feet. If 
the sword has no unobstructed path to you, it moves as 
use to you as it can and then falls to the ground. It also 
ceases to hover if you grasp it or move more than 30 feet 
vav from it. 


CHAPTces 1 gallon of water, 

* '‘Fountain ' produces 5 gallons of water. 

* “Geyser" produces 30 gallons of water that gushes 
forth in a geyser 30 feet long and 1 foot wide. As a 
bonus action while holding the decanter, you can aim 
the geyser at a creature you can see within 30 feet of 
you. The target must succeed on a DC 13 Strength 
saving throw or take ld4 bludgeoning damage and fall 
prone. Instead of a creature, you can target an object 
that isn't being worn or carried and that weighs no 
more than 200 pounds. The object is either knocked 
over or pushed up to 15 feet away from you. 

Deck of Illusions 

Wondrous item, uncommon 

This box contains a set of parchment cards. A full 
deck has 34 cards. A deck found as treasure is usually 
missing ld20- 1 cards. 

The magic of the deck functions only if cards are 
drawn at random (you canusean altered deck of playing 
cards to simulate the deck). You can use an action to 
draw a card at random from the deck and throw it to the 
ground at a point within 30 feet of you. 

An illusion of one or more creatures forms over the 
thrown card and remains until dispelled. An illusory 
creature appears real, of the appropriate size, and 
behaves as if it were a real creature (as presented in the 
Monster Manual ) t except that it can do no harm. While 
you are within 120 feet of the illusory creature and 
can see it, you can use anP would cause you 
to lose a level, you instead lose an amount that leaves 
you with just enough XP to keep your level. 

Gem. Twenty-five pieces of jewelry worth 2,000 
gp each or fifty gems worth 1,000 gp each appear at 
your feet. 

Idiot . Permanently reduce your Intelligence by ld4 + 1 
(to a minimum score of 1). You can draw' one additional 
card beyond your declared draws. 

Jester . You gain 10,000 XP. or you can draw two 
additional cards beyond vour declared draws. 

Key. A rare or rarer magic weapon with which you 
are proficient appears in your hands. The DM chooses 
the weapon. 

Knight. You gain the service of a 4th-level fighter who 
appears in a space you choose within 30 feet of you. The 
fighter is of the same race as you and serves you loyally 
until death, believing the fates have drawn him or her to 
you* You control this character. 

Moon. You are granted the ability to cast the wish 
spell 1d3 times. 

Rogue. A nonplayer character of the DM's choice 
becomes hostile toward you. The identity of your new 
enemy isn't known until the NPC or someone else 
reveals it. Nothing less than a wish spell or divine 
intervention can end the NPCs hostility toward you* 
Ruin. All forms of wealth that you carry or own, 
other than magic items, are lost to you* Portable 
property vanishes. Businesses, buildings, and land you 
own are lost in a way that alters reality theult terrain, ft takes : 

(1 d 1D) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object. 

Turning Immunity * The avatar is immune to features that 
turn undead. 

Actions 

Reaping Scythe , The avatar sweeps its spectral scythe throng" 
a creature within 5 feet of it, dealing 7 (1 d3 + 3) slashing 
damage plus 4 (IdS) necrotic damage, 

r ~ - 1 

Talons. Every magic Item you wear or carry 
disintegrates. Artifacts in your possession aren't 
destroyed but do vanish. 

Throne. You gain proficiency in the Persuasion skill 
and you double your proficiency bonus on checks made 
with that skill* In addition, you gain rightful ownership 
of a small keep somewhere in the world* However, the 
keep is currently in the hands of monsters, which you 
must clear out before you can claim the keep as yours. 

Vizier. At any time you choose within one year of 
drawing this card, you can ask a question in meditation 
arid mentally receive a truthful answer to that question. 
Besides information, the answer helps you solve a 
puzzling problem or other dilemma* In other words, the 
know ledge comes with wisdom on how to apply it. 

The Void. This black card spells disaster. Your soul 
is drawn from your body and contained in an object in a 
place of the DM's choice. One or more powerful beings 
guard the place* While your soul is trapped in this way, 
your body is incapacitated. A wish spell can't r 
1 \ ondrous item, rare 

\ u can use an action to place these shackles on 
an incapacitated creature. The shackles adjust to 
til a creature of Small to Large size. In addition to 
-crying as mundane manacles, the shackles prevent 
feature bound by them from using any method of 
-r radimensional movement, including teleportation 
c J travel to a different plane of existence. They 
n't prevent the creature from passing through an 
•erdimenstonal portal. 

You and any creature you designate when you use the 
shackles can use an action to remove them. Once every 
: J days, the bound creature can make a DC 30 Strength 
hletics) check. On a success, the creature breaks free 
ind destroys the shackles. 

Dragon Scale Mail 

4 rmor (scale mail), very rare (requires attune ment) 

[ ~agon scale mail is made of the scales of one kind 
t dragon. Sometimes dragons collect their cast-off 
s ales and gift them to humanoids. Other limes, hunters 
re fully skin and preserve the hide of a dead dragon. In 
her case, dragon scale mail is highly valued. 

While wearing this armor, you gain a +1 bonus to 
AC, you have advantage on saving throws against the 
Frightful Presence and breath weapons of dragons, 

-.nd you have resistance to one damage type that is 
determined by the kind of dragon that provided the 
scales (see the table). 

Additionally, you can focus your senses as an action 
magy until you or another creature grasps it. If you move 
more than 60 feet from the hovering globe, it follows 
you until it is within 60 feet of you. It takes the shortest 
route to do so. If prevented from moving, the globe sinks 
gently to the ground and becomes inactive, and its light 
winks out. 

Dust of Disappearance 

Wondrous item, uncommon 

Found in a small packet, this powder resembles very 
fine sand. There is enough of it for one use. When you 
use an action to throw the dust into the air, you and 


each creature and object within 10 feet of you become 
invisible for 2d4 minutes. The duration is the same for 
all subjects, and the dust is consumed when its magic 
takes effect. If a creature affected by the dust attacks or 
casts a spell, the invisibility ends for that creature. 

Dust of Dryness 

Wondrous item, uncommon 

This small packet contains ld6 + 4 pinches of dust. You 
can use an action to sprinkle a pinch of it over water. 
The dust turns a cube of water 15 feet on a side into one 
marble-sized pellet, which floats or rests near where the 
dust was sprinkled. The pellet’s weight is negligible. 

Someone can use an action to smash the pellet 
against a hard surface, causing the pellet to shatter and 
release the water the dust absorbed. Doing so ends that 
pellet’s magic. 

An elemental composed mostly of water that is 
exposed to a pinch of the dustontains it. The stopper can't 
be removed for 24 hours. The next two times the 
bottle is opened, the same effect occurs. If the 
bottle is opened a fourth time, the efreeti escapes 
and disappears, and the bottle loses its magic. 
The efreeti can cast the wish spell three times for 
you. It disappears when it grants the final wish or 
after 1 hour, and the bottle loses its magic. 


Dwarven Plate 

Armor (plate), very rare 

While wearing this armor, you gain a +2 bonus to AC. In 
.ddition. if an effect moves you against your will along 
the ground, you can use your reaction to reduce the 
distance you are moved by up to 10 feet. 

Dwarven Thrower 

\ r . capon (warhammer), very rare (requires at tenement 
by a dwarf) 

You gain a +3 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. It has the thrown property with 
a normal range of 20 feet and a long range of 60 feet, 

\\ hen you hit with a ranged attack using this weapon, 

: deals an extra 1d8 damage or, if the target is a giant, 
2d8 damage. Immediately after the attack, the weapon 
' ies back to your hand. 


Efreeti Chain 

Armor (chain mail), legendary (requires attunement) 

While wearing this armor, you gain a +3 bonus to AC. 
you are immune to fire damage, and you can understand 
and speak Primordial. In addition, you can stand on and 
walk across molten rock as if it were solid ground. 

Elemental Gem  use an 
action to remove the stopper, a cloud of thick smoke 
pours out in a 60-foot radius from the bottle. The 
cloud's area is heavily obscured. Each minute the 
bottle remains open and within the cloud, the radius 
increases by 10 feet until it reaches its maximum radius 
of 120 feet. 

CHAPTER 7 J TREASURE 


Eversmoking 

Bottle 


Ivory Goats 


The cloud persists as long as the bottle is open. 
Closing the bottle requires you to speak its command 
word as an action. Once the bottle is closed, the cloud 
disperses after 10 minutes. A moderate wind (11 to 20 
miles per hour) can also disperse the smoke after 1 
minute, and a strong wind (21 or more miles per hour) 
can do so after 1 round. 

Eyes of Charming 

Wondrous item , uncommon (requires attunement) 

These crystal lenses fit over the eyes. They have 3 
charges. While wearing them, you can expend 1 charge 
as an action to cast the charm person spell (save DC 13) 
on a humanoid w ithin 30 feet of you, provided that you 
and the target can see each other. The lenses regain all 
expended charges daily at dawn. 

Eyes of Minute Seeing 

Wondrous item . uncommon 

These crystal lenses fit over the eyes. While wearing 
them, you can see much better than normal out to a 
range of 1 foot. You have advantage on Intelligence 
(Investigation) checks that rely on sight while searching 
an area or studying an object wdthin thagain while touching it. When the 
creature becomes a figurine again, its property can't be 
used again until a certain amount of time has passed, as 
specified in the figurine's description. 

Bronze Griffon (Rare), This bronze statuette is of 
a griffon rampant. It can become a griffon for up to 6 
hours. Once it has been used, it can t be used again until 
5 days have passed. 

Ebony Fly (Rare), This ebony statuette is carved in 
the likeness of a horsefly, it can become a giant fly for 
up to 1 2 hours and can be ridden as a mount. Once 
it has been used, it can t be used again until 2 days 
have passed. 


Armor Class 11 

Hit Points 19 (3dl0 + 3) 

Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 



STR DEX CON 

INT WIS 

CHA 

14 (+2) 13 (+1) 13 (+1) 

2 (-4) 10 (+0) 

3 (-4) 

Senses darkvision 60 ft,, passive Perception 10 

Languages — 



Golden Lions (Rare), These gold statuettes of lions 
are always created in pairs. You can use one figurine or 
both simultaneously. Each can become a lion for up to 1 
hour. Once a lion has been used, it can t be used again 
until 7 days have passed. 

Ivory Goats (Rare), These ivory statuettes of goats 
are always created In sets of three. Each goat looks 
unique and functions differently from the others. Their 
properties are as follows: 

* The goat of traveling can become a Large goat 
with the same statistics as a riding horse. It has 24 
charges, and each hour or portion thereof it spends 
in beast form costs 1 charge. While it has charges, 
you can use it as often as you wish. When it runs out 
of charges, it reverts to a figurine and can t be used 
again until 7 days have passed, when it regains all 
its charges, 

- The goat of travail becomes a giant goat for up to 3 
hours. Once it has been used, it can't be used again 
until 30 days have passed. 


169 




CHAPTER 7 I TREASURE 





















































* The goat of terror becomes a giant goat for up to 3 
hours- The goat can't attack, but you can remove its 
horns and use them as weapons. One horn becomes 
a lance . and the other becomes a +2 longsword. 
Removing a horn requires an action, and the weapons 
disappear and the horns return when the goat reverts 
to figurine form. In addition, the goat radiates a 
30-foot-radius aura of terror while you are riding It. 
Any creature hostile to you that starts its turn in the 
aura must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw 
or be frightened of the goat for 1 minute, or until the 
goat reverts to figurine form. The frightened creature 
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Once 
it successfully saves against the effect, a creature is 
immune to the goat's aura for the next 24 hours. Once 
the figurine has been used, it can't at any range if you and it are on the same plane of 
existence. 

Silver Raven (Uncommon)* This silver statuette of 
a raven can become a raven for up to 12 hours. Once it 
has been used, it can't be used again until 2 days have 
passed. While in raven form, the figurine allows you to 
cast the animal messenger spell on it at will. 

Flame Tongue 

Weapon (any sword), rare (requires attunement) 

You can use a bonus action to speak this magic sword - 
command word, causing flames to erupt from the blade 
These flames shed bright light in a 40-foot radius and 
dim light for an additional 40 feet. While the sword is 
ablaze, it deals an extra 2d6 fire damage to any target 
it hits. The flames last until you use a bonus action to 
speak the command word again or until you drop or 
sheathe the sword. 

Folding Boat 
Wondrous item, rare 

This object appears as a wooden box that measures 1 - 
inches long, 6 inches wide, and 6 inches deep. It weighs 
4 pounds and floats. It can be opened to store items 
inside. This item also has three command words, each 
requiring you to use an action to speak it. 


CHAPTER 7 I TREASURE 



















One command word causes the box to unfold into a 
: at 10 feet long* * 4 feet wide* and 2 feet deep. The boat 
has one pair of oars, an anchor, a mast, and a lateen 
sail. The boat can hold up to four Medium creatures 
mfort ably, 

I The secons 
already 19 or higher. 

Gem of Brightness 

Wondrous item, uncommon 

This prism has 50 charges. While you are holding it. you 
can use an action to speak one of three command words 
to cause one of the following effects; 

« The first command word causes the gem to shed 
bright light in a 30-foot radius and dim light for 
an additional 30 feet. T his effect doesn't expend a 
charge. It lasts until you use a bonus action to repeat 
the command word or until you use another function 
of the gem. 

* The second command word expends 1 charge and 
causes the gem to fire a brilliant beam of light at 
one creature you can see within 60 feet of you. The 
creature must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving 
throw or become blinded for l minute. The creature 
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 

* The third command word expends 5 charges and 
causes the gem to flare with blinding light in a 30-foot 
cone originating from it. Each creature in the cone 
must make a saving throw as if struck by the beam 
created with the second command word. 

When all of the gem’s charges are expended, the gem 
becomes a non magical jewel worth 50 gp. 




i7t 



CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 
















Gem of Seeing 


Goggles of Night 


Gloves of 
Missile Snaring 


172 





Gem of Seeing 

Wondrous item, rare (requires attunemereaction to. 
reduce the damage by Id 10 + your Dexterity modifier, 
provided that you have a free hand. If you reduce the 
damage to 0. you can catch the missile if it is small 
enough for you to hold in that hand. 

Gloves of Swimming and Climbing 

Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement) 

While wearing these gloves, climbing and swimming 
don’t cost you extra movement, and you gain a +5 bonu- 
to Strength (Athletics) checks made to climb or swim. 

Gloves of Thievery 

Wondrous item, uncommon 

These gloves are invisible while worn. While wearing 
them, you gain a +5 bonus to Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) 
checks and Dexterity checks made to pick locks. 

Goggles of Night 

Wondrous item, uncommon 

While wearing these dark lenses, you have darkvision 
out to a range of 60 feet. If you already have darkvision. 
wearing the goggles increases its range by 60 feet. 


CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 























Hammer of Thunderbolts 

1 Veapon (maul), legendary 

You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. 

Giant’s Bane (Requires Attunement), Yoti must 
be wearing a belt of giant strength (any variety) and 
gauntlets of ogre power to attune to this weapon. The 
attunement ends if you take off either of those items. 
While you are attuned to this weapon and holding it. 
your Strength score increases by 4 and can exceed 20, 
but not 30its while wearing it: 

* You can use an action to cast one of the following 
spells (save DC 18), using one of the helm's gems of 
the specified type as a component: daylight (opal), 
fireball (fire opal), prismatic spray (diamond), or wall 
of fire (ruby). The gem is destroyed when the spell is 
cast and disappears from the helm, 

* As long as it has at least one diamond, the helm emits 
dim light in a 30-foot radius when at least one undead 
is within that area. Any undead that starts its turn in 
that area takes ld6 radiant damage, 

* As long as the helm has at least one ruby, you have 
resistance to fire damage, 

* As long as the helm has at least one fire opal, you can 
use an action and speak a command word to cause 
one weapon you are holding to burst into flames. 

The flames emit bright light in a 10-foot radius and 
dim light for an additional 10 feet. The flames are 
harmless to you and the weapon. When you hit with 



llAMMfR OF 

Thunderbolts 


Helm of Brilliance 


Helm of 
Comprehending Languages 


an attack using the blazing weapon, the target takes 
an extra ld6 fire damage. The flames last until you 
use a bonus action to speak the command word again 
or until you drop or stow the weapon. 

Roll a d20 if you are wearing the helm and take fire 
damage as a result of failing a saving throw against a 
spell. On a roll of 1, the helm emits beams of light frIf the 
haversack is turned inside out, its contents spill forth* 
unharmed, and the haversack must be put right before 
it can be used again. If a breathing creature is placed 
within the haversack, the creature can survive for up to 
10 minutes, after which time it begins to suffocate. 

Placing the haversack inside an extradimensional 
space created by a bag of holding, portable hole , or 
similar item instantly destroys both items and opens 
a gate to the Astral Plane* The gate originates where 
the one item was placed inside the other* Any creature 
within 10 feet of the gate is sucked through it and 
deposited in a random location on the Astral Plane. 

The gate then closes* The gate is one-way only and can't 
be reopened. 


This helm has 3 charges* While wearing it, you can 
use an action and expend 1 charge to cast the teleport 
spell from it. The helm regains ld3 expended charges 
daily at dawn. 


Holy Avenger 

Weapon (any sword), legendary (requires attunement by 
a paladin) 



Heward’s Handy Haversack 
Wondrous item, rare 

This backpack has a central pouch and two side 
pouches, each of which is an extradimensional space. 
Each side pouch can hold up to 20 pounds of material, 
not exceeding a volume of 2 cubic feet* The large 
central pouch can hold up to S cubic feet or 80 pounds 
of mate rial* The backpack always weighs 5 pounds, 
regardless of its contents*ve, a creature takes half as much 
damage and isn't deafened. Creatures and objects made 
f glass or crystal have disadvantage on the saving 
rhrow and take 10d6 thunder damage instead of 5d6. 

Each use of the horn’s magic has a 20 percent chance 
of causing the horn to explode. The explosion deals 
10d6 fire damage to the blower and destroys the horn. 

Horn of Valhalla 

Wondrous item, rare (silver or brass), very rare (bronze), 
or legendary (iron) 

You can use an action to blow this horn. In response, 
warrior spirits from the plane of Ysgard appear within 
60 feet of you. These spirits use the berserker statistics 
from the Monster Manual. They return to Ysgard after 1 
hour or when they drop to 0 hit points. Once you use the 
horn, it can’t be used again until 7 days have passed. 

Four types of horn of Valhalla are known to exist, each 
made of a different metal. The horn’s type determines 
how many berserkers answer its summons, as well as 
the requirement for its use. The DM chooses the horn’s 
type or determines it randomly. 

Berserkers 


dl00 

Horn Type 

Summoned 

Requirement 

01-40 

Silver 

2d4 + 2 

None 

41-75 

Brass 

3d4 + 3 

Proficiency with all 
simple weapons 

76-90 

Bronze 

4d4 + 4 

Proficiency with all 
medium armor 

91-00 

Iron 

5d4 + 5 

Proficiency with all 
martial weapons 


If you blow the horn without meeting its requireme check, moving the 
fixed rod up to 10 feet on a success. 

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 

175 
















Doss Lute 



Canaith 

Mandolin 


Mac 


Fu 


RM 


OH 


C 


T E R 


N 


A 




Mar 


Instrument of the Bards 

1 Vondrous item, rarity varies (requires attunement by a 
bard) 

An instrument of the bards is an exquisite example of it* 
kind, superior to an ordinary instrument in every way. 
Seven types of these instruments exist, each named 
after a legendary bard college. The following table lists 
the spells common to all instruments, as well as the 
spells specific to each one and its rarity. A creature that 
attempts to play the instrument without being attuned 
to it must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or 
take 2d4 psychic damage. 

You can use an action to play the instrument and cas' 
one of its spells. Once the instrument has been used to 
cast a spell it can t be used to cast that spell again until 
the next dawn. The spells use your spellcasting ability 
and spell save DC. 

When you use the instrument to cast a spell that 
causes targets to become charmed on a failed save, the 
targets have disadvantage on the saving throw. This 
effect applies whether you are using the instrument as 
the source of the spell or as a spellcasting Focus, 


Instrument 

All 


Anstruth harp Very rare 

Canaith Rare 

mandolin 


Cli lyre 
Doss lute 


Fochlucan 
band



















































A stone has AC 24* 10 hit points, and resistance to all 
damage. It is considered to be an object that is being 
worn while it orbits your head. 

Absorption (Very Rare). While this pale lavender 
ellipsoid orbits your head, vou can use your reaction to 
cancel a spell of 4th level or lower cast by a creature you 
can see and targeting only you. 

Once the stone has canceled 20 levels of spells, it 
burns out and turns dull gray. Losing its magic. If you 
are targeted by a spell whose level is higher than the 
number of spell levels the stone has left, the stone can t 
cancel it. 

Agility (Very Rare). Your Dexterity score increases by 
2. to a maximum of 20. while this deep red sphere orbits 
your head, 

Awareness (Rare). You can’t be surprised while this 
lark blue rhomboid orbits your head. 

Fortitude (Very Rare). Your Constitution score 
increases by 2, to a maximum of 20, while this pink 
rhomboid orbits your head. 

Grea ter A bsorption (Legen dary). Wh Oe th is ma rble d 
lavender and green ellipsoid orbits your head, you can 
use your reaction to cancel a spell of 8th level or lower 
cast by a creature you can see and targeting only you. 

Once the stone has canceled 50 levels of spells, it 
burns out and turns dull gray, losing its magic. If you 
are targeted by a spell whose level is higher than the 
number of spnes how much space it uses. 

While this stone orbits your head, you can cast any 
spell stored in it. The spell uses the slot level, spell save 
DC, spell attack bonus, and spellcasting ability of the 
original caster, but is otherwise treated as if you cast the 





spell. The spell cast from the stone is no longer stored in 
it, freeing up space. 

Strength (Very Rare). Your Strength score increases 
by 2. to a maximum of 20, while this pale blue rhomboid 
orbits your head. 

Sustenance (Rare). You don’t need to eat or drink 
while this clear spindle orbits your head. 

Iron Bands of Bilarro 

Wondrous item, rare 

This rusty iron sphere measures 3 inches in diameter 
and weighs 1 pound. You can use an action to speak 
the command word and throw the sphere at a Huge or 
smaller creature you can see within 60 feet of you. As 
the sphere moves through the air, it opens into a tangle 
of metal bands. 

Make a ranged attack roll with an attack bonus equal 
to your Dexterity modifier plus your proficiency bonus. 
On a hit, the target is restrained until you take a bonus 
action to speak the command word again to release it. 
Doing so, or missing with the attack, causes the bands 
to contract and become a sphere once more. 

A creature, including the one restrained, can use an 
action to make a DC 20 Strength check to break the 
iron bands. On a success, the item is destroyed, and alignment. 

An identify spell reveals that a creature is inside 
the flask, but the only way to determine the type of 
creature is to open the flask. A newly discovered bottle 
might already contain a creature chosen by the DM or 
determined randomly. 


dlOO 

Contents 

dl00 

Contents 

01-50 

Empty 

77-78 

Elemental (any) 

51 

Arcana loth 

79 

Githyanki knight 

52 

Cambion 

SO 

Githzerai zerth 

53-54 

Dao 

S1-S2 

Invisible stalker 

55-57 

Demon (type 1) 

£3-84 

Marid 

53=60 

Demon (type 2) 

85-86 

Mezzoloth 

61-62 

Demon (type 3) 

87-88 

Night hag 

63-64 

Demon (type 4) 

89-90 

Nycaloth 

65 

Demon (type 5) 

91 

Planetar 

66 

Demon (type 6) 

92-93 

Salamander 

67 

Deva 

94-95 

Slaad (any) 

68-69 

Devil (greater) 

96 

Solar 

70-72 

Devil (lesser) 

97-98 

Succubus/incubus 

73-74 

Djinni 

99 

Ultroloth 

75-76 

Efreeti 

00 

Xorn 


Javelin of Lightning 

Weapon (javelin), uncommon 

This javelin is a magic weapon. When you hurl it and 
speak its command word, it transforms into a bolt of 
lightning, forming a line 5 feet wide that extends out 
from you to a target within 120 feet. Each creature in 
the line excluding you and the target must make a DC 13 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 4d6 lightning damage on 
a failed save, and half as much damage on a successful 
one. The lightning bolt turns back into a javelin wk. If the sword is on your person, you can call 
on its luck (no action required) to reroll one attack roll 
ability check, or saving throw you dislike. You must use 
the second roll This property can’t be used again until 
the next dawn. 

Wish. The sword has ld4 - 1 charges. While holding 
it, you can use an action to expend 1 charge and cast 
the wish spell from it. This property can’t be used again 
until the next dawn. The sword loses this property if it 
has no charges. 

Mace of Disruption 

Weapon (mace), rare (requires attunement) 

When you hit a liend or an undead with this magic 
weapon, that creature takes an extra 2d6 radiant 
damage. If the target has 25 hit points or fewer after 
taking this damage, it must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom 
saving throw or be destroyed. On a successful save, the 
creature becomes frightened of you unti l the end of your 
next turn. 

While you hold this weapon, it sheds bright light in a 
20-foot radius and dim light for an additional 20 feet. 

Mace of Smiting 

Weapon (mace), rare 

You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. The bonus increases to +3 
when you use the mace to attack a construct. 

When you roll a 20 on an attack roll made with 
this weapon, the target takes an extra 7 bludgeoning 
damage, or an extra 14 bludgeoning damage if ids a 
construct. If a construct has 25 hit points or fts words 
are charged with magic. If you spend 48 hours over a 
period of 6 days or fewer studying the book's contents 
and practicing its guidelines, your Constitution score 
increases by 2, as does your maximum for that score. 
The manual then loses its magic, but regains it in 
a century. 

Manual of Gainful Exercise 
Wondrous item , very rare 

This book describes fitness exercises, and its words are 
charged with magic. If you spend 48 hours over a perioi 
of 6 days or fewer studying the book s contents and 
practicing its guidelines, your Strength score increases 
by 2, as does your maximum for that score. The tnanua 
then loses its magic, but regains it in a century. 

Manual of Golems 

Wondrous item, very rare 

This tome contains information and incantations 
necessary to make a particular type of golem. The DM 
chooses the type or determines it randomly. To decipher 
and use the manual, you must be a spellcaster with at 
least two 5th-level spell slots. A creature that can’t use 
a manual of golems and attempts to read it takes 6d6 
psychic damage. 


d20 

Golem 

Time 

Cost 

1-5 

Clay 

30 days 

65,000 gp 

6-17 

Flesh 

60 days 

50,000 gp 

18 

Iron 

120 days 

100,000 gp 

19-20 

Stone 

90 days 

80,000 gp 


CHAPTER 7 I I'REASURE 



















To create a golem, you must spend the time shown on 
the table, working without interruption with the ded charges daily at dawn. 

Mirror of Life Trapping 

\ Vondrous item, very rare 

When this 4-foot-ta.il mirror is viewed indirectly, its 
surface shows faint images of creatures. The mirror 
weighs 50 pounds, and it has AC 11, 10 hit points, and 
vulnerability to bludgeoning damage. It shatters and is 
destroyed when reduced to 0 hit points. 

If the mirror is hanging on a vertical surface and you 
are within 5 feet of it, you can use an action to speak its 
command word and activate it. It remains activated until 
you use an action to speak the command word again. 
Any creature other than you that sees its reflection 
in the activated mirror while within 30 feet of it must 
succeed on a DC 15 Charisma saving throw or be 
trapped, along with anything it is wearing or carrying, in 
one of the mirror’s twelve extradimensional cells. This 
saving throw is made with advantage if the creature 
knows the mirror s nature, and constructs succeed on 
the saving throw automatically. 

An extradimen si on a 1 cell is an infinite expanse filled 
w ith thick fog that reduces visibility to 10 feet. Creatures 
trapped in the mirror s cells don't age, and they don't 
need to eat, drink, or sleep. A creature trapped w ithin 
a cell can escape using magic that permits planar 
travel. Otherwise, the creature is confined to the cell 
until freed. 




Mirror of 
t fe Trapping 


Flesh Golems Stealth) checks or has a Strength requirement, the 
mithral version of the armor doesn’t. 

Necklace of Adaptation 

Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement) 

While wearing this necklace, you can breathe normally 
in any environment, and you have advantage on saving 
throws made against harmful gases and vapors (such 
as cloudkill and stinking cloud effects, inhaled poisons, 
and the breath weapons of some dragons). 

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 


Necklace of 
Prayer Beaos 


Necklace of Fireballs 

"V 

Wondrous item, rare 

This necklace has ld6 + 3 beads hanging from it. You 
can use an action to detach a bead and throw it up to 60 
feet away. When it reaches the end of its trajectory, the 
bead detonates as a 3rd-level fireball spell (save DC 15). 

You can hurl multiple beads, or even the whole 
necklace, as one action. When you do so. increase the 
level of the fireball by 1 for each bead beyond the first. 

A 

Necklace of Prayer Beads 

Wondrous item, rare (requires attunement by a cleric, 
druid, or paladin) 

This necklace has ld4 + 2 magic beads made from 
aquamarine, black pearl, or topaz. It also has many 
non magical beads made from stones such as amber, 
bloodstone, citrine, coral, jade, pearl, or quartz. If a 
magic bead is removed from the necklace, that bead 
loses its magic. 

Six types of magic beads exist. The DM decides the 
type of each bead on the neckee-dimensional objects by 
painting them in two dimensions. The paint flows from 
the brush to form the desired object as you concentrate 
on its image. 

Each pot of paint is sufficient to cover 1,000 square 
feet of a surface, which lets you create inanimate objects 
or terrain features—such as a door, a pit, flowers, frees, 
cells, rooms, or weapons—that are up to 10,000 cubic 
feet. It takes 10 minutes to cover 100 square feet. 

When you complete the painting, the object or terrain 
feature depicted becomes a real, non magical object. 
Thus, painting a door on a wall creates an actual door 
that can be opened to whatever is beyond. Painting a pit 
on a floor creates a real pit, and its depth counts against 
the total area of objects you create, 

Nothing created by the pigments can hav e a value 
greater than 25 gp. If you paint an object of greater value 


(such as a diamond or a pile of gold), the object looks 
authentic, but close inspection reveals it is made from 
paste, bone, or some other worthless material. 

If you paint a form of energy such as Are or lightning, 
the energy appears but dissipates as soon as you 
complete the painting, doing no harm to anything. 

Oathbow 

Weapon (longbow), very rare (requires a t tune men l) 

When you nock an arrow on this bow, it whispers in 
Elvish, “Swift defeat to my enemies." When you use 
this weapon to make a rangrcing 
ammunition. Applying the oil takes 1 minute. For 1 
hour, the coated item is magical and has a *3 bonus to 
attack and damage rolls. 

Oil of Slipperiness 

Potion, uncommon 

This sticky black unguent is thick and heavy in the 
container, but it flows quickly when poured. The oil can 
cover a Medium or smaller creature, along with the 
equipment it's wearing and carrying (one additional 
vial is required for each size category above Medium), 
Applying the oil takes 10 minutes. The affected creature 
then gains the effect of a freedom of movement spell 
for 8 hours. 

Alternatively, the oil can be poured on the ground as 
an action, where it covers a 10-foot square, duplicating 
the effect of the grease spell in that area for 8 hours. 

Pearl of Power 

Wondrous item . uncommon (requires attunement by a 
spellcastcr) 

You can use an action to speak this pearl's command 


word and regain one expended spell slot of up to 3rd 

level. Once you have used the pearl, it can’t be used 
again until the next dawn. 


C H A PT E R 7 | TR E A 5 U R E 


Periapt of Health 


Periapt of Health 

Wondrous item , uncommon 

You are immune to contracting any disease while you 
wear this pendant, if you are already infected with a 
disease, the effects of the disease are suppressed you 
while you wear the pendant. 

Periapt of Proof against Poison 
Wondrous item, rare 

This delicate on the saving throw. 

A creature that fails the saving throw can repeat it at the 
end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a 
success, A creature that succeeds on its saving throw 
is immune to the effect of these pipes for 24 hours. The 
pipes regain 1 c!3 expended charges daily at daw n. 

Pipes of the Sewers 

Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement) 

You must be proficient with wind instruments to use 
these pipes. While you are attuned to the pipes, ordinary 
rats and giant rats are indifferent toward you and will 
not attack you unless you threaten or harm them. 

The pipes have 3 charges. If you play the pipes as 
an action, you can use a bonus action to expend 1 to 
3 charges, calling forth one swarm of rats (see the 
Monster Manual for statistics) with each expended 
charge, provided that enough rats are within half a mile 
of you to be called in this fashion (as determined by 
the DM), If there aren't enough rats to form a swarm, 
the charge is wasted. Called swarms move toward the 
music by the shortest available route but aren't under 
your control otherwise. The pipes regain ld3 expended 
charges daily at dawn. 


Whenever a swarm of rats that isn't under another 
creature's control comes within 30 feet of you while you 
are playing the pipes, you can make a Charisma check 
contested by the swarm's Wisdom check. If you lose 
the contest, thndrical space within the hole exists 

CHAPTER 7 I TREASURE 

tfi 






















on a different plane, so it can't be > J create open 
passages. Any creature inside an open portable hole can 
exit the hole by climbing out of it. 

You can use an action to close a portable hole by 
taking hold of the edges of the cloth and folding it up. 
Folding the cloth closes the hole, and any creatures or 
objects within remain in the extradimensional space. No 
matter what’s in it. the bole weighs next to nothing. 

If the hole is folded up, a creature within the hole's 
extradimensional space can use an action to make 
a DC 10 Strength check. On a successful check, the 
creature forces its way out and appears within 5 feet of 
the portable hole or the creature carrying it. A breathing 
creature within a closed portable hole can survive for up 
to 10 minutes, after which time it begins to suffocate. 
Placing a portable hole inside an extradimensional 
space created by a bag of holding, Heward's handy 
haversack, or simi lar item instantly destroys both items 
and opens a gate to ihe Astral Plane. The gate originates 
where the one item was placed inside the other. Any 
creature within 10 feet of the gate is sucked through it 
and deposited in a random location on the Astral Plane, 
The gate then closes. The gate is one-way only and can't 
be reopened. 

Potton of Animal Friendshifailed save, or half as much damage on 
a successful one. The effect ends after you exhale the 
fire three times or when I hour has passed. 

This potion s orange liquid flickers, and smoke fills the 
top of the container and wafts out whenever it is opened. 

Potion of Flying 

Potion , very rare 

When you drink this potion, you gain a flying speed 
equal to your walking speed for I hour and can hover. 

If you’re in the air when the potion wears off. you fall 
unless you have some other means of staying aloft. This 
potion’s clear liquid floats at the top of its container and 
has cloudy white impurities drifting in it. 

Potion of Gaseous Form 

Potion, rare 

When you drink this potion, you gain the effect of 
the gaseous form spell for 1 hour (no concentration 
required) or until you end the effect as a bonus action. 
This potion s container seems to hold fog that moves 
and pours like water. 

Potion of Giant Strength 
Potion, rarity varies 

When you drink this potion, your Strength score 
changes for 1 hour. The type of giant determines the 
score (see the table below). The potion has no effect 
on you if your Strength is equal to or greater than 
that score. 

This potion's transparent liquid has floating in it a 
sliver of fingernail from a giant of the appropriate type. 
The potion of frost giant strength and the potion of stone 
giant strength have the same effy but feels as though 
it holds liquid. When you drink it, you become invisible 
for 1 hour. Anything you wear or carry is invisible with 
you. The effect ends early if you attack or cast a spell. 

Potion of Invulnerability 

Potion, rare 

For 1 minute after you drink this potion, you have 
resistance to all damage. The potions syrupy liquid 
looks like liquified iron. 

Potion of Longevity 

Potion, very rare 

When you drink this potion, your physical age is 
reduced by ld6 + 6 years, to a minimum of 13 years. 
Each time you subsequently drink a potion of longevity, 
there is 10 percent cumulative chance that you instead 
age by ld6 + 6 years. Suspended in this amber liquid 
are a scorpion’s tail, an adder s fang, a dead spider, 
and a tiny heart that, against all reason, is still beating. 
These ingredients vanish when the potion is opened. 

Potion of Mind Reading 

Potion , rare 

When you drink this potion, you gain the effect of the 
detect thoughts spell (save DC 13). The potions dense, 
purple liquid has an ovoid cloud of pink floating in it. 

Potion of Poison 

Potion, uncommon 

This concoction looks, smells, and tastes like a potion of 
healing or other beneficial potion. However, it is actually 
poison masked by illusion magic. An identify spell 
reveals its true nature. 

If you drink it, you take 3d6 poison damage, and you 
must succeed on a DC 13 Constitutis 
action to make a melee spell attack against a creature 
within 10 feet of the whip, w ith an attack bonus of +9* 

On a hit, the target takes Ld6 + 5 force damage* 

As a bonus action on your turn, you can direct the 
whip to fly up to 20 feet and repeat the attack against a 
creature within 10 feet of it* The whip disappears after 1 
hour, when you use an action to dismiss it, or when you 
are incapacitated or die* 


C>UJVEJR OF EHLONNA 
\ l ondrous item , uncommon 


Each of the quiver's three compartments connects to 
an extradimensional space that allows the quiver to 
hold numerous items while never weighing more than 
2 pounds. The shortest compartment can hold up to 
sixty arrows, bolts, or similar objects* The midsize 
compartment holds up to eighteen javelins or similar 
objects* The longest compartment holds up to six long 
objects, such as bows, quarter staffs, or spears. 

You can draw any item the quiver contains as if doing 
so from a regular quiver or scabbard. 


Ring of Animal Influence 
Ring, rare 

This ring has 3 charges, and it regains ld3 expended 
charges daily at dawn. While wearing the ring, you can 
use an action to expend 1 of its charges to cast one of 
the following spells: 


- Animal friendship (save DC 13) 

* Fear (save DC 13), targeting only beasts that have an 
Intelligence of 3 or lower 

* SpeaA with animals 


Fan Token 

Jm 


Anchor T. Spells cast from the ring have a 
save DC of 17. 

Ring of Air Elemental Command. You can expend 2 
of the ring's charges to cast dominate monster on an air 
elemental. In addition, when you fall, you descend 60 
feet per round and take no damage from falling. You can 
also speak and understand Auran. 

If you help slay an air elemental while attuned to 
the ring, you gain access to the following additional 
properties: 


CHAPTER 7 ! TREASURE 


Ring of A - 
Elemental C : ; 


* You have resistance to lightning damage. 

* You have a flying speed equal to your walking spee _ 
and can hover. 

* You can cast the following spells from the ring, 
expending the necessary number of charges: chair 
lightning (3 charges), gust of wind (2 charges), or wn 
wall{ 1 charge). 

Ring of Barth Elemental Command, You can exp- 
2 of the ring's charges to cast dominate monster on 
earth elemental. In addition, you can move in difficuf 
terrain that is composed of rubble, rocks, or dirt as 
if it were normal terrain. You can also speak and 
understand Terran* 

If you help slay an earth elemental wdiile attuned tc 
the ring, you gain access to the following additional 
properties: 

* You have resistance to acid damage. 

* You can move through solid earth or rock as if those 
areas were difficult terrain. If you end your turn the _ 
you are shunted out to the nearest unoccupied spa*: 
you laes: create or 
destroy water (1 charge), control water (3 charges), ice 
storm (2 charges), or wall of ice (3 charges). 

Ring of Evasion 

Ring, rare (requires attunement) 

This ring has 3 charges, and it regains ld3 expended 
charges daily at dawn. When you fail a Dexterity saving 
throw while wearing it, you can use your reaction 
to expend 1 of its charges to succeed on that saving 
throw r instead. 

Ring of Feather Falling 

Ring, rare (requires attunement) 

When you fall while wearing this ring, you descend 60 
feet per round and take no damage from falling. 

Ring of Free Action 

Ring, rare (requires attunement) 

While you wear this ring, difficult terrain doesn’t cost 
you extra movement. In addition, magic can neither 
reduce your speed nor cause you to be paralyzed or 
restrained. 

Ring of Invisibility 

Ring, legendary (requires attunement) 

While wearing this ring, you can turn invisible as an 
action. Anything you are wearing or carrying is invisible 


with you. You remain invisible until the ring is removed, 
until you attack or cast a spell, or until you use a bonus 
action to become visible again. 

Ring of Jumping 

Ring, uncommon (requires attunement) 

While wearing this ring, you can cast the jump spell 
from it as a bonus action at will, but can target only 
yourself when you do so. 

Ring of Mind Shielding 
Ring, uncommon (requires attunement) 

nce to one damage type while wearing 
this ring. The gem in the ring indicates the type, which 
the DM chooses or determines randomly. 


dlO 

Damage Type 

Gem 

1 

Acid 

Pearl 

2 

Cold 

Tourmaline 

3 

Fire 

Garnet 

4 

Force 

Sapphire 

5 

Lightning 

Citrine 

6 

Necrotic 

Jet 

7 

Poison 

Amethyst 

8 

Psychic 

Jade 

9 

Radiant 

Topaz 

10 

Thunder 

Spinel 


Ring of Shooting Stars 

Ring, very rare (requires attunement outdoors at night) 

While wearing this ring in dim light or darkness, you 
can cast dancing lights and light from the ring at will. 
Casting either spell from the ring requires an action. 

The ring has 6 charges for the following other 
properties. The ring regains ld6 expended charges 
daily at dawn. 

Faerie Fire. You can expend 1 charge as an action to 
cast faerie fire from the ring. 

Ball Lightning. You can expend 2 charges as an 
action to create one to four 3-foot-diameter spheres 
of lightning. The more spheres you create, the less 
powerful each sphere is individually. 

Each sphere appears in an unoccupied space you can 
see within 120 feet of you. The spheres last as long as 
you concentrate (as if concentrating on a spell), up to 1 
minute. Each sphere sheds dim light in a 30-foot radius. 

As a bonus action, you can move each sphere up to 
30 feet, but no farther than 120 feet away from you. 
When a creature other than  space it uses. 

While wearing this ring, you can cast any spell stored 
in it. The spell uses the slot level, spell save DC, spell 
attack bonus, and spellcasting ability of the original 
caster, but is otherwise treated as if you cast the spell. 
The spell cast from the ring is no longer stored in it, 
freeing up space. 



CHAPTER 7 I TREASURE 














E N G OF 
E£ Wishes 


RlNG OF 


Ring of 


Spell Turning 


Shooting Stars 


Water Walking 


Ring of Spell Turning 

Ring, legendary (requires attunement) 

While wearing this ring, you have advantage on saving 
throws against any spell that targets only you (not in 
an area of effect). In addition, if you roll a 20 for the 
save and the spell is 7th level or lower, the spell has no 
effect on you and instead targets the caster, using the 
slot level, spell save DC, attack bonus, and spellcasting 
ability of the caster. 

Ring of Swimming 

Ring, uncommon 

You have a swimming speed of 40 feet while wearing 
this ring. 

Ring of Telekinesis 

Ring, very rare (requires attunement) 

While wearing this ring, you can cast the telekinesis 
spell at will, but you can target only objects that aren't 
being worn or carried. 

Ring of the Ram 

Ring, rare (requires attunement) 

This ring has 3 charges, and it regains Id3 expended 
charges daily at dawn. While wearing the ring, you can 
use an action to expend 1 to 3 of it
appear transparent and don’t prevent light from passing 
through them. The vision can penetrate 1 foot of stone, 

1 inch of common metal, or up to 3 feet of wood or dirt. 
Thicker substances block the vision, as does a thin 
sheet of lead. 

Whenever you use the ring again before taking a long 
rest, you must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving 
throw or gain one level of exhaustion. 

Robe of Eyes 

Wondrous item , rare (requires attunement) 

This robe is adorned with eyelike patterns. W hile you 
wear the robe, you gain the following benefits: 

- The robe lets you see in all directions, and you have 
advantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks that 
rely on sight. 

* You have darkvision out to a range of 120 feet, 

- You can see invisible creatures and objects, as well as 
see into the Ethereal Plane, out to a range of 120 feet. 


CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 










Robe of Eyes 


Rose of Stars 


194 


CHAPTER 7 i TREASURE 


The eyes on the robe can t be closed or averted. 
Although you can close or avert your own eyes, you are 
never considered to be doing so while wearing this rob- 
A light spelt cast on the robe or a daylight spell cast 
within 5 feet of the robe causes you to be blinded for 1 
minute. At the end of each of your turns, you can make - 
Constitution saving throw (DC 11 for light or DC 15 for 
daylight), ending the blindness on a success. 

Robe of Scccupied, or if that spar 7 
is occupied, the nearest unoccupied space. 

Robe of the Arch magi 1 

Wondrous item f legendary (requires attunement by a 
sorcerer, warlock, or wizard) 

This elegant garment is made from exquisite cloth of 
white, gray, or black and adorned with silvery runes. 

The robe's color corresponds to the alignment for whic h 
the item was created. A white robe was made for good 
gray for neutral, and black for evil. You cant attune to 
a robe of the arch magi that doesn’t correspond to your 
alignment. 

You gain these benefits while wearing the robe: 

* If you aren’t wearing armor, your base Armor Class is 
15 Tyour Dexterity modifier, 

■ You have advantage on saving throws against spells 
and other magical effects. 

■ Your spell save DC and spell attack bonus each 
increase by 2. 













Robe or Useful Items 

libndrous item , uncommon 

This robe has cloth patches oi various shapes and colors 
covering it. While wearing the robe. >ou can use an 
action to detach one of the patches, causing it to become 
the object or creature it represents. Once the last patch 
is removed, the robe becomes an ordinary garment. 

The robe has two of each of the following patches: 

* Dagger 

* Builseye lantern (filled and lit) 

■ Steel mirror 

* 10-foot pole 

■ Hempen rope (50 feet, coiled) 

* Sack 

In addition, the robe has 4d4 other patchesorbs 50 levels of energy, it cant absorb more. If you 
ire targeted by a spell that the rod can't store, the rod 
has no effect on that spell. 

W hen you become attuned to the rod, you know how 
many levels of energy the rod has absorbed over the 
ourse of its existence, and how many levels of spell 
energy it currently has stored. 

If you are a spellcaster holding the rod. you can 
convert energy stored in it into spell slots to cast spells 
you have prepared or know. You can create spell slots 
inly of a level equal to or lower than your own spell 



Rod of 


Roes of THE 

Arcwmagi 


I9S 


CHAPTER 7 I TREASURE 



















Rgo of 
Resurrection 


CHAPTER 7 I TREASURE 
196 



slots, up to a maximum of 5th level You use the stored 
levels in place of your slots, but otherwise cast the spel’ 
as normal. For example, you can use 3 levels stored in 
the rod as a 3rd-!eve! spell slot, 

A newly found rod has Id 10 levels of speli energy 
stored in it already. A rod that can no longer absorb 
spell energy and has no energy remaining becomes 
non magical 

Rod of Alertness 

Rod, very rare (requires attunement) 

This rod has a hanged head and the following 
properties. 

Alertness. While holding the rod t you have advantage 
on Wisdom (Perception) checks and on rolls for 
initiative. 

Spells . While holding the rod, you can use an action 
to cast one of the followinhead. 

if you press button 2, the rod’s flanged head folds 
down and two crescent-shaped blades spring out, 
transforming the rod into a magic battleaxe that grants 
a +3 bonus to attack and damage rolls made with it. 

If you press button 3. the rod's flanged head folds 
down* a spear point springs from the rod s tip, and the 
rod s handle lengthens into a 6-foot haft, transforming 
the rod into a magic spear that grants a +3 bonus to 
attack and damage rolls made with it. 

If you press button 4. the rod transforms into a 
climbing pole up to 50 feet long, as you specify. In 
surfaces as hard as granite, a spike at the bottom and 
three hooks at the top anchor the pole. Horizontal 
bars 3 inches long fold out from the sides, 1 foot apart, 
forming a ladder. The pole can bear up to 4,000 pound- 






lore weight or Sack of solid an ■ ^ _ > - In rod to 

revert to its normal form. 

[f you press button 5, the rod transf rms into a 
handheld battering ram and grants irs user a -10 bonus 
10 Strength checks made to break through doors, 
barricades, and other barriers. 

If you press button 6, the rod assumes or remains in 
its normal form and indicates magnetic north. (Nothing 
happens if this function of the rod is used in a location 
rhat has no magnetic north.) The rod also gives you 
knowledge of your approximate depth beneath the 
ground or your height above it. 

Drai 
- an action while holding the rod. You can t use this 
: roperty again until you finish a long rest. 

Rod of Resurrection 

- ocL legendary (requires attunement by a cleric r druid, 
-paladin) 

The rod has 5 charges. While you hold it, you can use 
action to cast one of the follow ing spells from it: heal 
pends 1 charge) or resurrection (expends 5 charges). 
The rod regains 1 expended charge daily at dawn. If 
rod is reduced to 0 charges, roll a d20. On a 1. the 
: : disappears in a burst of radiance. 

Rod of Rulership 

Rod, rare (requires attunement) 

. u can use an action to present the rod and command 
bedience from each creature of your choice that you 
an see within 120 feet of you. Each target must succeed 
an a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or be charmed by you 
8 hours. While charmed in this way, the creature 
regards you as its trusted leader. If harmed by you or 
j ur companions, or commanded to do something 


ontrary to its nature, a target ceases to be charmed 
in this way. The rod can't be used again until the 
next dawn. 

Rod of Security 
Rod. very rare 

While holding this rod, you can use an action to activate 
it. The rod then instantly transports you and up to 199 
other willing creatures you can see to a paradise that 
exists in an extraplanar space. You choose the form that 
the paradise takes. It could be a tranquil garden, lovely 
glade, cheery tavers maximum length away, or until you 
tell it to stop. You can also tell the rope to fasten itself 
securely to an object or to unfasten itself, to knot or 
unknot itself, or to coil itself for carrying. 

If you tell the rope to knot, large knots appear at 
1-foot intervals along the rope. While knotted, the rope 
shortens to a 50-foot length and grants advantage on 
checks made to climb it. 

The rope has AC 20 and 20 hit points. It regains 1 
hit point every 5 minutes as long as it has at least 1 hit 
point. If the rope drops to 0 hit points, it is destroyed. 

Rope of Entanglement 
Wondrous item , rare 

This rope is 30 feet long and weighs 3 pounds. If you 
hold one end of the rope and use an action to speak its 
command word, the other end darts forward to entangle 
a creature you can see within 20 feet of you. The target 
must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or 
become restrained. 

You can release the creature by using a bonus action 
to speak a second command word, A target restrained 


CHAPTER 7 l TREASURE 
































by the rope can use an action to make a DC 15 Strength 
or Dexterity check (target 1 s choice). On a success, the 
creature is no longer restrained by the rope. 

The rope has AC 20 and 20 hit points. It regains 1 
hit point every 5 minutes as long as it has at least 1 hit 
point. If the rope drops to 0 hit points, it is deeature chosen by the DM or determined randomly by 
roiling on the following table. 


Using an action to read the scroll encloses you in a 
invisible barrier that extends from you to form a 5-foot- 
radius, 10-foot-high cylinder. For 5 minutes, this barrier 
prevents creatures of the specified type from entering or 
affecting anything within the cylinder. 

The cylinder moves with you and remains centered on 
you. However, if you move in such a way that a creature 
of the specified type would be inside the cylinder, the 
effect ends. 

A creature can attempt to overcome the barrier by 
using an action to make a DC 15 Charisma check. 

On a success, the creature ceases to be affected by 
the barrier. 

Sending Stones 

Wondrous item, uncommon 

Sending stones come in pairs, with each smooth stone 
carved to match the other so the pairing is easily 
recognized. While you touch one stone, you can use an 
action to cast the sending spell from it. I'he target is the 
bearer of the other stone. If no creature bears the other 
stone, you know that fact as soon as you use the stone 
and don't cast the spelh 

Once sending is cast through the stones, they can't be 
used again until the next dawn. If one of the stones in a 
pair is destroyed, the other one becomes nonmagical. 

Sentinel Shield 
A rnior (sh ieId), uncom mon 

While holding this shield, you have advantage on 
initiative roponer 
Otherwise, the scroll is unintelligible. 

If the spell is on your class's spell list but of a highe 
level than you can normally cast, you must make an 
ability check using your spellcasting ability to determ - 
whether you cast it successfully. The DC equals 10 + rh* 
spell's level. On a failed check, the spell disappears lr ~ 
the scroll with no other effect. 

Once the spell is cast, the words on the scroll fade, 
and the scroll itself crumbles to dust. 

The level of the spell on the scroll determines the 
spells saving throw DC and attack bonus, as well as th 
scroll's rarity, as shown in the Spell Scroll table. 

Spell Scroll 


Shield, +1, +2, or +3 

Armor (shield), uncommon (+1). rare (+2), or very 
rare (+3) 

While holding this shield, you have a bonus to AC 
determined by the shield’s rarity. This bonus is in 
addition to the shield’s normal bonus to AC* 

Shield of Missile Attraction 

Armor (shield), rare (requires attunement) 

While holding this shield, you have resistance to 
damage from ranged weapon attacks* 

Curse . This shield is cursed. Attuning to it curses 
you until you are targeted by the remove curse spell 
or similar magic. Removing the shield fails to end the 
curse on you* Whenever a ranged weapon attack is 
made against a target within 10 feet of you, the curse 
causes you to become the target instead. 


Spell Level 

Rarity 

Save Duches the sphere 
but isn’t wholly engulfed and obliterated by it takes 4clI0 
force damage. 

The sphere is stationary until someone controls it. 

If you are within 60 feet of an uncontrolled sphere, 
you can use an action to make a DC 25 Intelligence 
: Arcana) check. On a success, the sphere levitates in one 
direction of your choice, up to a number of feet equal to 
5 x your Intelligence modifier (minimum 5 feet). On a 
failure, the sphere moves 10 feet toward you. A creature 
whose space the sphere enters must succeed on a DC 
13 Dexterity saving throw or be touched by it, taking 
4dlQ force damage. 

If you attempt to control a sphere that is under another 
creature’s control, you make an Intelligence (Arcana) 
check contested by the other creature’s Intelligence 
(Arcana) check. The winner of the contest gains control 
of Lhe sphere and can levitate it as normal. 

If the sphere comes into contact with a planar 
portal such as that created by the gate spell or an 
extradimensional space, such as that within a portable 
hole, the DM determines randomly what happens, using 
the following table, 

cflOQ Result 

61 —50 The sphere is destroyed, 

51-85 The sphere moves through the portal or into the 
extradimensional space, 

S6-GQ A spatial rift sends each creature and object within 
180 feet of the sphere, including the sphere, to a 
random plane of existence. 

Sfire (4 charges). 

The staff regains UJ6 + 4 expended charges daily 
at dawn. If you expend the Iasi charge, roll a d20. On 
a 1, the staff blackens, crumbles into cinders, and is 
destroyed. 


CHAPTER 7 I TREASURE 

SOI 














Staff of 
Power 




Staff of 

Swarming Insects 


Staff of Frost 

Staff, very rare (requires artunement by a druid* 
sorcerer, warlock, or wizard) 

You have resistance to cold damage while you hold 
this staff. 

The staff has 10 charges. White holding it. you can use 
an action to expend 1 or more of its charges to cast on>r 
of the following spells from it, using your spell save DC 
cone of cold (5 charges), fog cloud (1 charge), ice stern 
(4 charges), or wall of ice (4 charges). 

The staff regains ld6 + 4 expended charges daily at 
dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll a d20. On a 1* 
the staff turns to water and is destroyed. 

Staff of Healing 

Staff, rare (requires altunement by a bard, cleric, or 
druid) 

This staff has 10 charges. While holding it. you can use 
an action to expend 1 or more of its charges to cast one 
of the following spells from it, using your spell save DC 
and spellcasting ability modifier: cure wounds (1 chare* 
per spell level, up to 4th). lesser restoration (2 charges 
or mass cure wounds (5 charges). 

The staff regains ld6 + 4 expended charges daily at 
dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll a d20face, 
performing a retributive strike. The staff is destroyed 
and releases its remaining magic in an explosion that 
expands to fill a 30-foot-radius sphere centered on it. 

You have a 50 percent chance to instantly travel to 
a random plane of existence, avoiding the explosion. 

If you fail to avoid the effect, you take force damage 


Staff of 
Frost 


CHAPTER 7j TREASURE 













equal to 16 * the number of charges in :he staff. Every 
[her creature in the area must make a DC i " Dexterity 
saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes an 
amount of damage based on how far awa\ it is from the 
point of origin, as shown in the follow ing table. On a 
successful save, a creature takes half as much damage. 

Distance from Origin Damage 

10 ft. away or closer S x the number of charges in the staff 

11 to 20 ft. away 6 x the number of charges in the staff 
21 to 30 ft. away 4 x the number of charges in the staff 

Staff of Striking 

Staff, very rare (requires at tenement) 

This staff can he wielded as a magic quarterstaff 
.hat grants a 4-3 bonus to attack and damage rolls 
made with it. 

The staff has 10 charges. When you hit with a melee 
Attack using it, you can expend up to 3 of its charges. 

For each charge you expend, the target takes an extra 
ld6 force damage. The staff regains ld6 + 4 expended 
. barges daily at dawn. If you expend the last charge, 
ro above 50, the staff explodes as if you activated 
its retributive strike (see below). 

Spells . While holding the staff, you can use an 
action to expend some of its charges to cast one of the 
following spells from it, using your spell save DC and 
spellcasting ability: conjure elemental (7 charges), dispel 
magic (3 charges), fireball (7th-level version, 7 charges), 
darning sphere (2 charges), ice storm (4 charges). 
invisibility (2 charges), knock (2 charges), lightning bolt 
(7th-level version. 7 charges), passwali (5 charges), plane 
shift (7 charges), telekinesis (5 charges), wall of fire (4 
charges), or web (2 charges). 

You can also use an action to cast one of the following 
spells from the staff without using any charges: arcane 
lock, detect magic, enlarge/reduce, light , mage hand, or 
protection from evil and good. 

Retributive Strike * You can use an action to break 
the staff over your knee or against a solid surface, 
performing a retributive strike. The staff is destroyed 
and releases its remaining magic in an explosion that 
expands to fill a 30-foot-radius sphere centered on it. 

You have a 50 percent chance to instantly travel to 
a random plane of existence, avoiding the explosion. 

If you fail to avoid the effect, you take force damage 
equal to 16 * the number of charges in the staff. Every 
other creature in the area must make a DC 17 Dexterity the snake reverts to staff form before losing 
all its hit points, it regains all of them. 

Staff of the Woodlands 

Staff rare (requires attunement by a druid) 

This staff can be wielded as a magic quarterstaff that 
grants a +2 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with it. While holding it, you have a +2 bonus to spell 
attack rolls. 

The staff has 10 charges for the following properties. 

It regains ld6 + 4 expended charges daily at dawn. 

If you expend the last charge, roll a d20. On a 1, the 
staff loses its properties and becomes a non magical 
quarterstaff. 

Spells . You can use an action to expend 1 or more 
of the staffs charges to cast one of the following spells 
from it. using your spell save DC: animal friendship (1 
charge), awaken (5 charges), barkskin (2 charges), locate 
animals or plants (2 charges), speak with animals (1 
charge), speak with plants (3 charges), or wall of thorns 
(6 charges). 

You can also use an action to cast the pass without 
trace spell from the staff without using any charges. 

Tree Form . You can use an action to plant one end 
of the staff in fertile earth and expend 1 charge to 
transform the staff into a healthy tree. The tree is 60 feet 
tall and has a 5-foot-diameter trunk, and its branches at 
the top spread out in a 20-foot radius. The tree appears 
ordinary but radiates a faint aura of transmutation 
magic if targeted * You can use an action to cause the staff 
to issue a deafening thunderclap* audible out to 600 
feet. Each creature within 60 feet of you (not including 
you) must make a DC 17 Constitution saving throw* On 
a failed save* a creature takes 2d6 thunder damage and 
becomes deafened for 1 minute* On a successful save, a 
creature takes half damage and isn't deafened* 

Thunder and Lightning* You can use an action to 
use the Lightning Strike and Thunderclap properties at 
the same time* Doing so doesn't expend the daily use of 
those properties* only the use of this one* 

Staff of Withering 

Staff, rare (requires allurement by a cleric, druid, or 
warlock) 

This staff has 3 charges and regains 1d3 expended 
charges daily at dawn. 

The staff can be wielded as a magic quarterstaff. On 
a hit, it deals damage as a normal quarterstaff, and you 
can expend 1 charge to deal an extra 2d 10 necrotic 
damage to the target. In addition* the target must 
succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or have 
disadvantage for 1 hour on any ability check or saving 
throw that uses Strength or Constitution* 

Stone of Controlling Earth Elementals 

Wondrous item* rare 

If the stone is touching the ground, you can use an 
action to speak its command word and summon an 
earth elemental, as if you had cast the conjure elemental 
spell* The stone can t be used this way again until the 
next dnine of these blades are 
known to exist Each is patterned after the legendary 
sword Fragaraeh, which is variously translated as 
“Final Word," Each of the nine swords has its own 
name and alignment, and each bears a different gem in 
its pommel. 


Name 

Alignment 

Gem 

Answerer 

Chaotic good 

Emerald 

Back Talker 

Chaotic evil 

jet 

Concluder 

Lawful neutral 

Amethyst 

Last Quip 

Chaotic neutral 

Tourmaline 

Rebutter 

Neutral good 

Topaz 

Repfier 

Neutral 

Peridot 

Retorter 

Lawful good 

Aquamarine 

Scather 

Lawful evil 

Garnet 

Squelcher 

Neutral evil 

Spinel 


You gain a +3 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this sword. In addition, while you hold the sword, 
you can use your reaction to make one melee attack 
with it against any creature in your reach that deals 
damage to you. You have advantage on the attack roll, 
and any damage dealt with this special attack ignores 
any damage immunity or resistance the target has. 


Sword of Life Stealing 

Weapon (any sword), rare (requires attunement) 

When you attack a creature with this magic weapon m 
roll a 20 on the attack roll, that target takes an extra 11 
necrotic damage if it isn't a construct or an undead. \ 
also gain 10 temporary hit points. 

Sword of Sharpness I 

Weapon (any sword that deals slashing damage), very 
rare (requires attunement) 

When you attack an object wi
















Talisman of 
Ultimate Evil 


alignment, a flaming Assure opens under it. The target 
must succeed on a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw or fall 
into the fissure and be destroyed, leaving no remains. 
The fissure then closes, leaving no trace of its existence. 
When you expend the last charge, the talisman 
disperses into motes of golden light and is destroyed. 

Talisman of the Sphere 

Wondtons item , legendary (requires attunemcnt) 

When you make an Intelligence (Arcana) check to 
control a sphere of annihilation while you are holding 
this talisman, you double your proficiency bonus on the 
check. In addition, when you start your turn with control 
over a sphere of annihilation, you can use an action to 
levitate it 10 feet plus a number of additional feet equal 
to 10 x your Intelligence modifier. 

Talisman of Ultimate Evil 

Wondrous item, legendary (requires at tune me nt by a 

creature of evil alignment) 

This item symbolizes unrepentant evil A creature that 
is neither good nor evil in alignment takes 6d6 necrotic 
damage upon touching the talisman, A good creature 
takes 8d6 necrotic damage upon touching the talisman. 
Either sort of creature takes the damage again each 
time it ends its turn holding or carrying the talisman. 

If you are an evil cleric or paladin, you can use the 
talisman as a holy symbol, and you gain a +2 bonus to 
spell attack ress. 


Talisman of Pure Good 

\ Vondrous item t legendary (requires attunement by a 
: feature of good alignment) 

This talisman is a mighty symbol of goodness, A 
creature that is neither good nor evil in alignment takes 
6d6 radiant damage upon touching the talisman. An 
evil creature takes 8d6 radiant damage upon touching 
he talisman. Either sort of creature takes the damage 
igain each time it ends its turn holding or carrying 
lie talisman. 

If you are a good cleric or paladin, you can use the 
alisman as a holy symbol, and you gain a +2 bonus to 
spell attack rolls while you wear or hold it. 

The talisman has 7 charges. If you are wearing or 
holding it, you can use an action to expend 1 charge 
from it and choose one creature you can see on the 
ground within 120 feet of you. If the target is of evil 


drop to 0 hit points or it does, or until you can't reach 
the creature to make a melee attack against it. 

You can break the curse in the usual ways. 
Alternatively, casting banishment on the sword forces 
Lhe vengeful spirit to leave it. The sword then becomes a 
+] weapon with no other properties. 






















Vicious Weapon 



Tome of Clear Thought 


Tentacle Rod 


Tome of Le ad e sshi p 


Tome of 
Understanding 


208 


Tentacle Rod 

Rod , rare (requires attune men t) 


Made by the drow, this rod is a magic weapon that ends 
in three rubbery t by 2. as d< - 
your maximum for that score. The manual then loses 
magic, but regains it in a century. 

Tome of the Stilled Tongue 

Wondrous item r legendary (requires attunement by a 
wizard) 

This thick leather-bound volume has a desiccated 
tongue pinned to the front cover. Five of these tomes 
exist, and it’s unknown which one is the original Thv 
grisly cover decoration on the first tome of the stilled 
tongue once belonged to a treacherous former servant 
of the lich-god Veen a, keeper of secrets. The tongues 
pinned to the covers of the four copies came from other 
spell casters who crossed Vecna, The first few T pages < 
each tome are filled with indecipherable scrawls. The 
remaining pages are blank and pristine. 

If you can attune to this item, you can use it as a 
spellbook and an arcane focus. In addition, while 
holding the tome, you can use a bonus action to cast a 
spell you have written in this tome, without expendin_ 
a spell slot or using any verbal or somatic component 
Once used, this property of the tome can't be used agars 
until the next dawn. 

While attuned to the book, you can remove the tong;_- 
from the book's cover, if you do so, all spells written in 
the book are permanently erased. 



CHAPTER 7 I TREASURE 





























CHAPTER 7 ! TREASURE 


Veen a watches anyone using this tome. He can also 
v. rite cryptic messages in ted charges daily at dawn. If you 
expend the wand s last charge, roll a d20, On a L the 
wand crumbles into ashes and is destroyed. 

Spells . While holding the wand, you can use an 
action to expend some of its charges to cast one of the 


Universal 

Solvent 


I r. i dent of Fish Command 
U eapon (trident), uncommon (requires attunement) 

This trident is a magic weapon* It has 3 charges. While 
an carry it* you can use an action and expend 1 charge 
: ' cast dominate beast (save DC 15) from it on a beast 
hat has an innate swimming speed. The trident regains 
ld3 expended charges daily at dawn. 


Universal Solvent 

■ i ondrous item , legendary 

This tube holds milky liquid with a strong alcohol 
smell You can use an action to pour the contents of the 
tube onto a surface within reach. The liquid instantly 
dissolves up to 1 square foot of adhesive it touches, 
including sovereign glue * 


Vicious Weapon 
I Yeapon (any), rare 

When you roll a 20 on your attack roll with this magic 
weapon, the target lakes an extra 7 damage of the 
weapons type. 


Trident of 
Fjsn Command 









following spells (save DC 17}: hold monster (5 charges) 
or hold person (2 charges). 

Assisted Escape. While holding the wand, you 
can use your reaction to expend 1 charge and gain 
advantage on a saving throw you make to avoid being 
paralyzed or restrained, or you can expend 1 charge ned of you for 1 minute. While it is 
frightened in this way, a creature must spend its turns 
trying to move as far away from you as it can, and it car ' 
willingly move to a space within 30 feet of you. It also 
can't take reactions. For its action, it can use only the 
Dash action or try to escape from an effect that prevent =• 
it from moving, if it has nowhere it can move, the 
creature can use the Dodge action. At the end of each 
its turns, a creature can repeat the saving throw, ending 
the effect on itself on a success. 

Wand of Fireballs 

Wand, rare (requires attunement by a spellcaster) 

This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can us~ 
an action to expend 1 or more of its charges to cast the 
fireball spell (save DC 15) from it. For 1 charge, you 
cast the Srd-Ievel version of the spell. You can increase 
the spell slot level by one for each additional charge 
you expend. 

The wand regains ld6 + 1 expended charges daily at 
dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll a d20. 

On a 1, the wand crumbles into ashes and is destroyed 


yio 


CHAPTER 7 i TREASL RL 








■'■and of Lightning Bolts 

Hand rare (requires attunement by a spellcaster) 

This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can use 
an action to expend 1 or more of its charges to cast the 
Sghtning bolt spell (save DC 15) from it* For 1 charge, 
u cast the 3rd-level version ofnd of each of the 
target's turns* it can repeat the saving throw* ending the 
effect on itself on a success* 

The wand regains ld6 + 1 expended charges daily at 
dawn* If you expend the wand’s last charge, roll a d20. 
On a 1, the wand crumbles into ashes and is destroyed, 

■ Wand of Polymorph 

\ l and. very rare (requires attunement by a spe lie aster) 

This wand has 7 charges. While holding it* you can 
use an action to expend 1 of its charges to cast the 
polymorph spell (save DC 15) from it. 

The wand regains ld6 + 1 expended charges daily at 
dawn. If you expend the wand’s last charge* roll a d20. 
On a L the wand crumbles into ashes and is destroyed, 

I Wand of Secrets 

Wand, uncommon 

The wand has 3 charges. While holding it, you can use 
an action to expend 1 of its charges, and if a secret door 
or trap is within 30 feet of you, the wand pulses and 
points at the one nearest to you* The wand regains ld3 
expended charges daily at dawn* 




Wand o? Lightning. Bolts 


Wand of Magic Detection 


Wand of Magic Missiles 


Wand of Paralysis 




CHAPTER ? | fKILASURE 

V---. 211 






















dl 00 
01-05 
06-10 
11-15 

16-20 
21 -25 


26-30 

31-3.3 


34-36 


37-46 

47-49 






Wand of Wee 


wand of Wonder 


50-53 


Effect 

You cast stow. 

You cast faerie fire. 

You are stunned until the start of your next turr, 
bel ieving something ancommon (requires attunement by a spell caster) 

This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can use 
an action to expend 1 of its charges to cast the web spell 
(save DC 15) from it. 

The wand regains 1d6 + 1 expended charges daily at 
dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll a d20. 
On a 1, the wand crumbles into ashes and is destroyed. 

Wand of Wonder 

Wand, rare (requires attunement by a speltoaster) 

This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can use 
an action to expend 1 of its charges and choose a target 
within 120 feet of you. The target can be a creature, an 
object, or a point in space. Roll dlOQ and consult the 
following table to discover what happens. 

If the effect causes you to cast a spell from the wand, 
the spell’s save DC is 15. If the spell normally has a 
range expressed in feet, its range becomes 120 feel if it 
isn't already. 

If an effect covers an area, you must center the spell 
on and include the target. If an effect has multiple 
possible subjects, the DM randomly determines which 
ones are affected. 

The wand regains ld6 + 1 expended charges daily at 
dawn. If you expend the wand’s last charge, roll a d2G. 
On a 1, the wand crumbles into dust and is destroyed. 








dlOO Effect 

54-58 You cast darkness. 

59-62 Crass grows on the grounc n a 60-Foot radius 
centered on the target. If grass is already there, 
it grows of your 
companions within 30 feet of you can t be surprised, 
except when incapacitated by something other than 
non magical sleep. The weapon magically awakens you 
and your companions within range if any of you are 
sleeping naturally when combat begins. 

Well of Many Worlds 
Wondrous item , hgen da ry 

This line black cloth, soft as silk, is folded up to the 
dimensions of a handkerchief It unfolds into a circular 
sheet 6 feet in diameter. 

You can use an action to unfold and place the well of 
many worlds on a solid surface* whereupon it creates a 
two-way portal to another world or plane of existence. 
Bach time the item opens a portal, the DM decides 
where it leads. You can use an action to close an open 





Tq 


DE 


NT 


OF 


N 


96-97 


98-00 


the area that can see must succeed on a DC 15 
Constitution saving throw or become blinded for 
1 minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw 
at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on 
itself on a success. 

The target's skin turns bright blue for IdlO days. If 
you chose a point in space, the creature nearest to 
that point is affected, 

if you targeted a creature, it must make a DC 15 
Constitution saving throw. If you didn't target a 
creature, you become the target and must make 
the saving throw. If the saving throw fails by 5 or 
more, the target is instantly petrified. On any other 
failed ey aren’t in use. 


Wings of Flying 

Wondrous item „ rare (requires attunement) 

While wearing this cloak, you can use an action to 
speak its command word, Thish turns the cloak into a 
pair of bat wings or bird wings on your back for 1 hour 
or until you repeat the command word as an action. 

The wings give you a flying speed of 60 feet. When they 
disappear, you can't use them again for Id 12 hours. 


Sentient Magic Items 

Some magic items possess sentience and personality. 
Such an item might be possessed, haunted by the spir : 
of a previous owner, or self-aware thanks to the magi 
used to create it. In any case, the item behaves like a 
character, complete with personality quirks, ideals, 
bonds, and sometimes flaws, A sentient item might 
be a cherished ally to its wielder or a continual thorn 
in the side. 

Most sentient items are weapons. Other kinds of iter^n 
can manifest sentience, but consumable items such a- 
potions and scrolls are never sentient. 

Sentient magic items function as NPCs under the 
DMs control. Any activated property of the item is 
under the item’s control, not its wielders. As long' as 
the wielder maintains a good relationship with the 
item, the wielder can access those properties normal 1>. 

If the relationship is strained, the item can suppress 
its activated properties or even turn them against 
the wielder. 

Creating Sentien
CHAPTER 7 1 TREASURE 













































Alignment 

A sentient magic Item has an alignment. Its creator or 
nature might suggest an alignment. If not, you can pick 
an alignment or roll on the following table. 


dlOO 

Alignment 

dfOO 

Alignment 

01-15 

lawful good 

74-85 

Chaotic neutral 

16-35 

Neutral good 

86-89 

Lawful evil 

36 —50 

Chaotic good 

90-96 

Neutral evil 

31-63 

64-73 

Lawful neutral 

Neutral 

97-00 

Chaotic evil 


Characteristics 

Use the information on creating NPCs in chapter 4 
to develop a sentient item s mannerisms, personality 
traits, ideals, bonds, and flaws. You can also draw on the 
"Special Features” section earlier in this chapter. 

If you determine these characteristics randomly, 
ignore or adapt any result that doesn't make sense 
for an inanimate object. You can reroll until you get a 
result you like. 

Special Purpose 

You can give a sentient item an objective it pursues, 
perhaps to the exclusion of all else. As tong as the 
wielder’s use of the item aligns with that special 
purpose, the item remains cooperative. Deviating from 
this course might cause conflict between the wielder 
and the item, and could even cause the item to prevent 
the use of its activated properties. You can pick a special 
purpose or roll on the following table. 

dlO Purpose 

1 Aligned: The item seeks to defeat or destroy those 
of a diametrically opposed alignment. (Such an 
item is never neutral.) 

2 Bane: The item seeks to defeat or destroy creatures 
of a particular kind, such as fiends, shapechangers, 
trolls, or wizards. 

3 Protector: The item seeks to defend a particular 
race or kind of creature, such as elves or druids. 

4 Crusader: The item seeks to defeat, weaken, or 
destroy the servants of a particular deity, 

5 Templar: The item seeks to defend the servants 
and interests of a particular deity. 

6 Destroyer: The Item craves destruction and goads 
its user to fight arbitrarily. 

7 Glory Seeker: The item seeks renown as the 
greatest magic item in the world, by establishing 
its user as a famous or notorious figure, 

3 Lore Seeker: The item craves knowledge or is 

determined to solve a mystery, learn a secret, or 
unravel a cryptic prophecy. 

9 Destiny Seeker: The item is convinced that it and its 
wielder have key roles to play in future events. 

10 Creator Seeker: The item seeks its creator and 
wants to understand why it was created. 


Conflict 

A sentient item has a will of its own, shaped by its 
personality and alignment. If its wielder acts in a 
manner opposed to the item's alignment or purpose, 
conflict can arise. When such a conflict occurs, the item 
makes a Charisma check contested by the wielder's 
Charisma check. If the item wins the contest,Sentience . Blackrazor is a sentient chaotic neutral 
weapon with an Intelligence of 17, a Wisdom of 10, and 
a Charisma of 19. It has hearing and darkvtsion out to a 
range of 120 feet. 

The weapon can speak, read, and understand 
Common, and can communicate with its wielder 
.elepathically* Its voice is deep and echoing. While you 
ire attuned to it Blackrazor also understands every 
language you know. 

Personality. Black razor spea ks with an imperious 
:one t as though accustomed to being obeyed. 

The sword’s purpose is to consume souls. It doesn't 
are whose souls it eats* including the wielders. The 
sword believes that all matter and energy sprang from 
void of negative energy and will one day return to it. 
Blackrazor is meant to hurry that process along. 

Despite its nihilism, Blackrazor feels a strange 
kinship to Wave and Whelm, two other weapons locked 
away under White Plume Mountain, It wants the three 
weapons to be united again and wielded together in 
combat, even though it violently disagrees with Whelm 
and finds Wave tedious. 

Blackrazor s hunger for souls must be regularly fed. If 
:he sword goes three days or more without consuming 
c soul, a confl ict between it and its wielder occurs at the 
next sunset. 

Moonblade 

\ 1 capon (longsword). legendary (requires allurement by 
an elf or half-elf of neutral good alignment) 

Jf all the magic items created by the elves, one of the 
most prized and jealously guarded is a moonblade. In 
ancient times* nearly all elven noble houses claimed one 
such blade. Over the centuries, some blades have faded 
from the world, their magic lost as family lines have 
become extinct. Other blades have vanished with their 
bearers during great quests. Thus, only a few of these 
weapons remain, 

A moonblade passes down from parent to child. The 
sword chooses its bearer and remains bonded to that 
person for life. If the bearer dies, another heir can 
claim the blade. If no worthy heir exists, the sword lies 
dormant. It functions like a normal lotigsword until a 
worthy soul finds it and lays claim to its power, 

A moonblade serves only one master at a time. The 
artunement process requires a special ritual in the 
:krone room of an elven regent or in a temple dedicated 
lo the elven gods. 

A moonblade won t serve anyone it regards as 
craven, erratic, corrupt, or at odds with preserving and 
protecting elvenkind. If the blade rejects you, you make 
ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws with 
disadvantage for 24 hours* If the blade accepts you, you 
become attuned to it and a new rune appears on the 


blade. You remain attuned to the weapon until you die or 
the weapon is destroyed. 

V moonblade has one rune on its blade for each 
master it has served (typically ld6 + 1). The fffect 
on itself on a success. This property can’t be used 
again until you take a short rest while attuned to 
the weapon. 

97-98 The moonblade functions as a ring of spell storing ; 

99 You can use an action to call forth an elfshadow, 
provided that you don't already have one serving 
you. The elfshadow appears in an unoccupied 
space within 120 feet of you. It uses the statistics 
for a shadow from the Monster Manual, except it 
is neutral, immune to effects that turn undead, 
and doesn't create new shadows. You control 
this creature, deciding how it acts and moves. It 
remains until it drops to 0 hit points or you dismiss 
it as an action. 

00 The moonblade functions as a vorpaf si word. 

Sentience * A moonblade is a sentient neutral good 
weapon with an Intelligence of 12, a Wisdom of 10, and 
a Charisma of 12, It has hearing and dark vision out to a 
range of 120 feet. 

The weapon communicates by transmitting emotions* 
sending a tingling sensation through the wielder’s hand 


C H A FT E R 7 1 TREAM T R l 


when it wants to communicate something it has sensed. 
It can communicate more explicitly, through visions or 
dreams, when the wielder is either in a trance or asleep. 

Personality. Every moonblade seeks the advancement 
of elvenkind and elven ideals. Courage, loyalty, beauty, 
music, and life are all part of this purpose. 

The weapon is bonded to the fuan. It 
can also speak with aquatic animals as if using a speak 
with animals spell, using telepathy to involve its wielder 
in the conversation. 

Personality. When it grows restless, Wave has a habit 
of humming tunes that vary from sea chanteys to sacred 
hymns of the sea gods. 

Wave zealously desires to convert mortals to the 
worship of one or more sea gods, or else to consign the 
faithless to death. Conflict arises if the wielder fails to 
further the weapons objectives in the world. 

The trident has a nostalgic attachment to the 
place where it was forged, a desolate island called 
Thunderforge. A sea god imprisoned a family of storm 
giants there, and the giants forged Wave in an act of 
devotion to—or rebellion against—that god. 

Wave harbors a secret doubt about its own nature and 
purpose. For all its devotion to the sea gods, Wave fears 
that it was intended to bring about a particular sea god’s 
demise. This destiny is something Wave might not be 
able to avert. 


Whelm 

Weapon (warhammer), legendary (requires attunement 
by a dwarf) 

Whelm is a powerful warhammer forged by dwarves 
and lost in the dungeon of White Plume Mountain. 

You gain a +3 bonus to attack and damage rolls 
made with this magic weapon. At dawn the day after 
you first make an attack roll with Whelm , you develop 
a fear of being outdoors that persists as long as you 
remain attuwful neutral weapon 
with an Intelligence of 15, a Wisdom of 12, and a 
Charisma of 15. It has hearing and darkvision out to a 
range of 120 feet. 

The weapon communicates telepathically with its 
wielder and can speak, read, and understand Dwarvish. 
Giant, and Goblin. It shouts battle cries in Dwarvish 
when used in combat. 

Personality. Whelm' s purpose is to slaughter giants 
and goblinoids. It also seeks to protect dwarves against 
all enemies. Conflict arises if the wielder fails to destroy 
goblins and giants or to protect dwarves. 

Whelm has ties to the dwarf clan that created it, 
variously called the Dankil or the Mightyhammer clan. 

It longs to be returned to that clan. It would do anything 
to protect those dwarves from harm. 

The hammer also carries a secret shame. Centuries 
ago, a dwarf named Ctenmiir wielded it valiantly for 
a time. But Ctenmiir was turned into a vampire. His 
will was strong enough that he bent Whelm to his evil 
purposes, even killing members of his own clan. 


CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 












Artifacts 

An artifact is a unique magic item of tremendous power, 
with its own origin and history. An artifact might have 
been created by gods or mortals of awesome power. 

It could have been created in the midst of a crisis that 
threatened a kingdom, a world, or the entire multiverse. 
and carry the weight of that pivotal moment in historyrties typically change each time an artifact 
appears in the world. 

An artifact can have as many as four minor beneficial 
properties and two major beneficial properties. It can 
have as many as four minor detrimental properties and 
two major detrimental properties. 


Minor Beneficial Properties 

dlOO Property 

01-20 While attuned to the artifact, you gain proficiency 
in one skill of the DM’s choice. 

While attuned to the artifact, you are immune to 
disease. 

While attuned to the artifact, you can’t be charmed 
or frightened. 

While attuned to the artifact, you have resistance 
against one damage type of the DM’s choice. 

While attuned to the artifact, you can use an action 
to cast one cantrip (chosen by the DM) from it. 
While attuned to the artifact, you can use an action 
to cast one lst-level spell (chosen by the DM) from 
it. After you cast the spell, roll a d6. On a roll of 
1-5, you can’t cast it again until the next dawn. 
71-80 As 61-70 above, except the spell is 2nd level. 

81-90 As 61-70 above, except the spell is 3rd level. 

91-00 While attuned to the artifact, you gain a +1 bonus 
to Armor Class. 




ii?; 


Major 

dlOO 

01-20 


21-30 


31-40 


41-50 


51-60 


61-70 

71-80 

81-90 

91-00 






Beneficial Properties 

Property 

While attuned to the artifact, one of your ability 
scores (DM’s choice) increases by 2, to a 
maximum  While attuned to the artifact, all holy water within 
10 feet of you is destroyed, 

36-40 While attuned to the artifact, you are physically 
it! and have disadvantage on any ability check or 
saving throw that uses Strength or Constitution, 
41-45 While attuned to the artifact, your weight increases 
by l d4 x 10 pounds, 

46-50 While attuned to the artifact, your appearance 
changes as the DM decides, 

51-55 While attuned to the artifact, you are deafened 
when you are more than 10 feet away from it, 

56-60 While attuned to the artifact, your weight drops by 
1d4 x 5 pounds. 

61-65 While attuned to the artifact, you can't smell, 

66-70 While attuned to the artifact, nonmagical flames 
are extinguished within 30 feet of you. 

71 —SO While you are attuned to the artifact, other 

creatures can't take short or long rests while within 
300 feet of you. 

81-85 While attuned to the artifact, you deal ld6 necrotic 
damage to any plant you touch that isn't a creature, 
S6-90 While you are attuned to the artifact, animals 
within 30 feet of you are hostile toward you, 

91-95 While attuned to the artifact, you must eat and 
drink six times the normal amount each day. 

96-00 While you are attuned to the artifact, your flaw is 
amplified in a way determined by the DM. 


Major Detrimental Properties 

dl 00 Property 

01-05 While you are attuned to the artifact, your body 
rote 

Monster Manual ), Each time you use one of the 
artifact's properties as an action, the slaad has 
a 10 percent chance of escaping, whereupon it 
appears within 15 feet of you and attacks you. 

31-35 While you are attuned to the artifact, creatures of i 
particular type other than humanoid (as chosen b\ 
the DM) are always hostile toward you, 

36-40 The artifact dilutes magic potions within 10 feet o r 
it, rendering them nonmagical, 

41-45 The artifact erases magic scrolls within 10 feet of 
it, rendering them nonmagical, 

46-50 Before using one of the artifact’s properties as 
an action, you must use a bonus action to draw 
blood, either from yourself or from a willing or 
incapacitated creature within your reach, using a 
piercing or slashing melee weapon. The subject 
takes ld4 damage of the appropriate type. 

51-60 When you become attuned to the artifact, you 

gain a form of long-term madness (see chapter 8. 
“Running the Game"). 

61 — 65 You take 4dl0 psychic damage when you become 
attuned to the artifact, 

66-70 You take Sdl0 psychic damage when you become 
attuned to the artifact, 

71-75 Before you can become attuned to the artifact, you 
must kill a creature of your alignment. 


CHAPTER 7 i TREASURE 















dlOO Property 

76-80 When you become attires :: :-.e an '"act, one 
of your ability scores s 'ec..: : I a: random!. 

A greater restornd digested by the 
tarrasque or some other ancient creature, 

- The artifact must be bathed in the blood of a god 
or an angel 

- The artifact must be struck and shattered by a special 
weapon crafted for that purpose, 

■ The artifact must be pulverized between the titanic 
gears of Mechanus. 

■ The artifact must be returned to its creator, who can 
destroy it by touch. 

Sample Artifacts _ 

The artifacts presented here have appeared in one or 
more of D&D worlds. Use them as guides when creating 
your own artifacts, or modify them as you see fit. 

Axe of the Dwarvish Lords 
\ 1 capon (battieaxe), artifact (requires attunement) 

Seeing the peril his people faced, a young dwarf prince 
nme to believe that his people needed something to 
unite them. Thus, he set out to forge a weapon that 
would be such a symbol 

Venturing deep under the mountains, deeper than 
any dwarf had ever delved, the young prince came to 


the blazing heart of a great volcano. With the aid of 
Moradin* the dwarven god of creation, he first crafted 
four great tools; the Brutal Pick , the Earth heart Forge, 
the Anvil of Songs, and the Shaping Hammer With 
them, he forged the Axe of the Dwarvish Lords. 

Armed with the artifact, the prince returned to the 
dwarf clans and brought peace. His axe ended grudges 
and answered slights. The clans became allies, and 
they threw back their enemies ann to cast the conjure elemental 
spell from it, summoning an earth elemental. You can’t 
use this property again until the next dawn. 

Travel the Depths . You can use an action to touch the 
axe to a fixed piece of dwarven stonework and cast the 
teleport spell from the axe. If your intended destination 
is underground, there is no chance of a mishap or 
arriving somewhere unexpected. You can't use this 
property again until 3 days have passed. 

Corse. The axe bears a curse that affects any non¬ 
dwarf that becomes attuned to it. Even if the attlinement 
ends, the curse remains. With each passing day, the 
creature's physical appearance and stature become 
more dwarflike. After seven days, the creature looks like 
a typical dwarf, but the creature neither loses its racial 
traits nor gains the racial traits of a dwarf. The physical 
changes wrought by the axe aren’t considered magical 
in nature (and therefore can t be dispelled), but they can 
be. undone by any effect that removes a curse, such as a 
greater restoration or remove curse spell. 

Destroying the Axe . The only way to destroy the 
axe is to melt it down in the Earth heart Forge , where 
it was created. It must remain in the burning forge for 
fifty years before it finally succumbs to the fire and 
is consumed. 

Book of Exalted Deeds 

Wondrous item , artifact (requires attunement by a 
creature of good alidamage disappears in a blinding flash a: 
is destroyed, leaving its possessions behind. 

Benefits granted by the Book of Exalted Deeds Iasi 
only as long as you strive to do good. If you fail to 
perform at least one act of kindness or generosity with 
the span of 10 days, or if you willingly perform an evil 
act, you lose all the benefits granted by the book. 

Random Properties, The Book of Exalted Deeds has 
the following random properties: 

- 2 minor beneficial properties 
« 2 major beneficial properties 

Increased Wisdom * After you spend the requisite 
amount of time reading and studying the book, your 
Wisdom score increases by 2, to a maximum of 24, Y _ 
can't gain this benefit from the book more than once. 

Enlightened Magic. Once you’ve read and studied 
the book, any spell slot you expend to cast a cleric or 
paladin spell counts as a spell slot of one level higher 

Halo. Once you've read and studied the book, you 
gain a protective halo. This halo sheds bright light 
in a 10-foot radius and dim light for an additional 10 
feet. You can dismiss or manifest the halo as a bonus 
action. While present, the halo gives you advantage on 
Charisma (Persuasion) checks made to interact with 
good creatures and Charisma (Intimidation) checks 
made to interact with evil creatures. In addition, fiends 
and undead within the halo’s bright light make attack 
rolls againsesence. Ordinary 
plants wither in its presence, animals are unw illing to 
approach it. and the book gradually destroys whatever 
it touches. Even stone racks and turns to powder if i: 
book rests on it long enough. 





Vile Lore 

The Book of Vile Darkness touches on even, evil in the 
cosmos, A character can use the <ore the book contains 
to unearth terrible secrets no mortal sho_ jI d know. Among 
the contents a character might find are the following, plus 
whatever else you choose: 


* Vile Apotheosis. The book could hold a ritual that allows a 
character to become a lich or death knight, 

« True Names. The true names of any number offiends 
might be in the book. 

■ Dark Magic. Several spells of horrific evil of the DM’s 
design and choosing could be in the book. Spells could 
impose dreadful curses, disfigure others, require human 
sacrifice, afflict creatures with crippling pain, spread vile 
plagues, and so on. 


A creature attuned to the book must spend $0 hours 
reading and studying it to digest its contents and reap its 
benefits. The creature can then freely modify the book’s 
contents, provided that those modifications advance evil 
and expand the lore already contained within. 

Whenever a non-evil creature attunes to the Book 
of Vile Darkness , that creature must make a DC 17 
Charisma saving throw. On a failed save, the creature's 
alignment changss grants you 
advantage on Charisma (Persuasion) checks made to 
interact with evil creatures and Charisma (Intimidation) 
checks made to interact with non-evil creatures. 

Command Evil, While you are attuned to the book 
and holding it, you can use an action to cast the 
dominate monster spell on an evil target (save DC 18). 
You can’t use this property again until the next dawn. 



Dark Lore - You can reference the Book of Vile 
Darkness whenever you make an Intelligence check 
to recall information about some aspect of evil, such 
as lore about demons. When you do so. double your 
proficiency bonus on that check. 

Dark Speech , While you carry the Book of Vile 
Darkness and are attuned to it, you can use an action 
to recite words from its pages in a foul language known 
as Dark Speech. Each time you do so, you take Id 12 


CHAPTER 7 TREASURE 


233 



















psychic damage, and each non-evil creature within 15 
feet of you takes 3d6 psychic damage. 

Destroying the Book. The Book of \ 7/e Darkness 
allows pages to be torn from it. but any evil lore 
contained on those pages finds its way back into the 
book eventually, usually when a new author adds pages 
to the tome. 

If a solar tears the book in two. the book is destroyed 
for IdlOO years, after which it reforms in some dark 
corner of the multiverse. 

A creature attuned to the book for one hundred 
yeon, Kas brought the Undying King's rule to an end 
in a terrible battle that left Vecna’s tower a heap of ash. 
Of Vecna, all that remained were one hand and one eye T 
grisly artifacts that still seek to work the Whispered 
One’s willtn the world. 

The Eye of Vecna and the Hand of Vecna might 
be found together or separately. The eye looks like a 
bloodshot organ torn free from the socket. The hand is a 
mu mm i lied and shriveled left extremity. 

To attune to the eye, you must gouge out your own eye 
and press the artifact into the empty socket. The eye 
grafts itself to your head and remains there until you 
die. Once in place, the eye transforms into a golden eye 
with a slit for a pupil, much like that of a cat. If the eye is 
ever removed, you die. 

To attune to the hand, you must lop off your left 
hand at the wrist and the press the artifact against 
the stump. The hand grafts itself to your arm and 
becomes a functioning appendage. If the hand is es^er 
removed, you die. 

Random Properties, The Eve of Vecna and the Hand 
of Vecna each have the following random properties: 


CHA.PTEH 7 \ TREASURE 


- 1 minor beneficial property 

* 1 major beneficial property 

* 1 minor detrimental property 

Properties of the Eye. Your alignment changes c 
neutral evil, and you gain the following benefits: 

* You have truesight, 

* You can use an action to see as if you w^pecific act in mind or leave it up lc« - - 

Properties of the Eye and Hand. If you are attur. d 
to both the hand and eye, you gain the following 
additional benefits: 

- You are immune to disease and poison. 

* Using the eye's X-ray vision never causes you to sum 
exhaustion. 

- You experience premonitions of danger and, unless 
you are incapacitated, can t be surprised. 

* If you start your turn with at least 1 hit point, you 
regain Id 10 hit points, 

- If a creature has a skeleton, you can attempt to tu i 
bones to jelly with a touch of the Hand of Vecna. \ a 
can do so by using an action to make a melee atta 
against a creature you can reach, using your choi 
your melee attack bonus for weapons or spells. Or a 
hit, the target must succeed on a DC 18 Consl.it in 
saving throw or drop to 0 hit points. 

* You can use an action to cast wish. This property ci 
he used again until 30 days have passed. 

Destroying the Eye and Hand * I f the Eye of Vecna 
and the Hand of Vecna are both attached to the san 
creature, and that creature is slain by the Swore/ of 
Kas , both the eye and the hand burst into flame, turr 




While you are charmed by the orb, you can t 
voluntarily end your attunement to it, and the orb casts 
suggestion on you at will (save DC 18), urging you 
to work toward the evil ends it desires. The dragon 
essence within the orb might want many things: te, including the 
attacks and breath weapons of dragons. A disintegrate 
spell or one good hit from a +3 magic weapon is 
sufficient to destroy an orb, however. 


to ash, and are destroyed forever. Any other attempt to 
destroy the eye or hand seems to work, but the artifact 
reappears in one of Vecna’s many hidden vaults, where 
it waits to be rediscovered. 

Orb of Dragonkind 

Wondrous item, artifact (requires attunement) 

Ages past, on the world of Krynn, elves and humans 
waged a terrible war against evil dragons. When the 
world seemed doomed, the wizards of the Towers of 
High Sorcery came together and worked their greatest 
magic, forging five Orbs of Dragonkind (or Dragon Orbs) 
zo help them defeat the dragons. One orb was taken 
:o each of the five towers, and there they were used to 
speed the war toward a victorious end. The wizards 
used the orbs to lure dragons to them, then destroyed 
the dragons with powerful magic. 

As the Towers of High Sorcery fell in later ages, the 
•rbs were destroyed or faded into legend, and only three 
ire thought to survive. Their magic has been warped 
and twisted over the centuries, so although their 
primary purpose of calling dragons still functions, they 
also allow some measure of control over dragons. 

Each orb contains the essence of an evil dragon, a 
r resence that resents any attempt to coax magic from 
Those lackingthereby. 

The Sword of Kas is a magic, sentient longs word that 
grants a +3 bonus to attack and damage rolls made with 
it. Jt scores a critical hit on a roll of 19 or 20. and deals 
an extra 2d 10 slashing damage to undead. 

If the sword isn't bathed in blood within 1 minute of 
being drawn from its scabbard, its wielder must make a 
DC 15 Charisma saving throw. On a successful save, the 
wielder take 3d6 psychic damage. On a failed save, the 
wielder is dominated by the sword, as if by the dominate 
monster spell, and the sword demands that it be 
bathed in blood. The spell effect ends when the sword's 
demand is met. 

Random Properties, The Swore/ of Kas has the 
following random properties: 

* 1 minor beneficial property 

* 1 major beneficial property 

* 1 minor detrimental property 

* 1 major detrimental property 


Wand of Orcus 


CHAPTER 1 I TREASURE 


Spirit of Kas, While the sword is on your person, you 
add a dlO to your initiative at the start of every combat. 

In addition, when you use an action to attack with the 
sword, you can transfer some or all of its attack bonus t: 
your Armor Class instead. The adjusted bonuses remair 
in effect until the start of your next turn. 

Spells . While the sword is on your person, you can 
use an action to cast one of the following spells (save L 
IS) from it: call lightning, divine word , or finger of deal ~ 
Once you evil as its creator, shares the demon 
lord s aims to snuff out the lives of all living things and 
bind the Material Plane in the stasis of undeath. Orcus 
allows the wand to slip from his grasp from time to time. 
When il does, it magically appears wherever its master 
senses an opportunity to achieve some fell goal. 

Made from bones as hard as iron, the wand is topped 
with a magically enlarged skull that once belonged to 
a human hero slain by Orcus. The wand can magically 
change in size to better conform to the grip of its user. 
Plants wither, drinks spoil, flesh rots, and vermin thrive 
in the wand s presence. 

Any creature besides Orcus that tries to attune to the 
wand must make a DC 17 Constitution saving throw. 

On a successful save, the creature takes 10d6 necrotic 
damage. On a failed save, the creature dies and rises 
as a zombie. 

In the hands of one who is attuned to it, the wand can 
be wielded as a magic mace that grants a +3 bonus to 
attack and damage rolls made with it. The wand deals 
an extra 2d 12 necrotic damage on a hit. 

Random Properties • The Wand ofOrcus has the 
following random properties: 

* 2 minor beneficial properties 

* l major beneficial property 

* 2 minor detrimental properties 

* 1 major detrimental property 

The detrimental properties of the Wand ofOrcus are 
suppressed while the wand is attuned to Orcus himself. 

Protection. You gain a +3 bonus to Armor Class while 
holding the wand. 

Spells* The wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you 
can use an action and expend 1 or more of its charges 
to cast one of the following spells (save DC IS) from 
it: animate dead (1 charge), blight (2 charges), circle of 
death (3 charges), Unger of death (3 charges), power 
word kill (4 charges), or speak with dead (1 charge). The 
wand regains ld4 + 3 expended charges daily at dawn. 

While attuned to the wand, Orcus or a follower 
blessed by him can cast each of the wand's spells using 
2 fewer charges (minimum of 0), 

Call Undead* Whileyou are holding the wand, you 
can use an action to conjure skeletons and zombies, 
calling forth as many of them as you can divide 500 hit 
points among, each undead having average hit points 
(see the Monster Manual for statistics). The undead 
magically rise up from the ground or otherwise form in 
unoccupied spaces within 300 feet of you and obey your 
commands until they are destroyed or until dawn of 
ihe next day, when they collapse into inanimate piles of 
bones and rotting corpses. Once you use this property 
of the wand, you can t use it again until the next dawn. 

While attuned to the wand, Orcus can summon any 
kind of undead, not just skeletons and zombies. The 
undead don't perish or disappear at dawn the following 
day, remaining until Orcus dismisses them.e the characters' 
accomplishments, including supernatural gifts that 
give characters new capabilities: titles. Lands, and other 
marks of prestige: and boons that are available only to 
adventurers who have reached 20th level. 

Supernatural Gifts _ 

A supernatural gift is a special reward granted 
by a being or force of great magical power. Such 
supernatural gifts come in two forms: blessings and 
charms. A blessing is usually bestowed by a god or 
a godlike being, A charm is typically the work of a 
powerful spirit, a location of ancient magic, or a creature 
that has legendary actions. Unlike a magic item, a 
supernatural gift isn't an object and doesn’t require 
attunement. It gives a character an extraordinary ability, 
which can be used one or more times. 

Blessings 

A character might receive a blessing from a deity for 
doing something truly momentous—an accomplishment 
that catches the attention of both gods and mortals. 
Killing rampaging gnolls rarely warrants such a 
blessing, but slaying the high priest of Tiamat as he 
attempts to summon the Dragon Queen might. 

A blessing is an appropriate reward for one of the 
following accomplishments: 

* Restoring the most sacred shrine of a god 

* Foiling an earthshaking plot by the enemies of a god 

* Helping a god s favored servant complete a holy quest 

An adventurer might also receive a blessing In 
advanceg mimics the 
properties of a wondrous item. 

Blessing of Health, Your Constitution score increases 
by 2, up to a maximum of 22. 

Blessing of Protection, You gain a +1 bonus to AC 
and saving throws. 

Blessing of Magic Resistance. You have advantage on 
saving throws against spells and other magical effects. 

Blessing of Understanding, Your Wisdom score 
increases by 2. up to a maximum of 22. 

Blessing of Valhalla. This blessing grants you the 
power to summon spirit warriors, as if you had blown a 
silver horn of Valhalla. Once you use this blessing, you 
can’t use it again until 7 days have passed. 

Blessing of Weapon Enhancement. One non magical 
weapon in your possession becomes a ~f~1 weapon 
whenever you wield it. 

Blessing of Wound Closure . This blessing grants you 
the benefits of a periapt of wound closure. 

Charms 

A charm is a minor supernatural gift, which can 
be received in a large variety of ways. For example, 
a wizard who finds an eldritch secret in a dead 
arch mage $ spellbook might be infused with the magic 
of a charm, as might a character who solves a sphinx's 
ridd le o r d r i n ks from a m a gi c fou n ta i n. Le gen d ary 
creatures, such as ancient gold dragons and unicorns, 
sometimes grace their allies w ith charms, and some 
explorers find themselves bearing the magic of a charm 
after discovering a long-last location that is drenched  do so, the charm vanishes from you. 

Charm of Restoration, f h is c har m h as 6 ch a rge s. 

You can use an action to expend some of its charges 
to cast one of the following spells: greater restoration 
(4 charges) or lesser restoration (2 charges). Once 
all its charges have been expended, the charm 
vanishes from you. 

Charm of the Slayer* One sword in your possession, 
becomes a dragon slayer or giant slayer (DM’s choice 
for the next 9 days. The charm then vanishes from you, 
and the weapon returns to normal. 

Charm of Vitality. This charm allows you to give 
yourself the benefit of a potion of vitality as an action. 
Once you do so, the charm vanishes from you. 

Marks of Prestige _J 

Sometimes the most memorable reward for adventurers 
is the prestige that they acquire throughout a realm. 
Their adventures often earn them fame and power, 
allies and enemies, and titles that they can pass on to 
their descendants. Some lords and ladies began as 
commoners who ventured into the dangerous places of 
the world and made names for themselves through the t 
brave deeds. 

This section details the most common marks of 
prestige that adventures might acquire during a 
campaign. These marks are usually gained along with 
treasure, but sometimes they stand on their own. 

Letters of Recommendation 

When gold is in short supply, the adventurers’ 
benefactor might providelish citizens, while 
the Golden Bear of Breland (a medal made of gold and 
shaped in a likeness of a bear s head, with gems for 
eyes) might be reserved for adventurers w ho prove their 
allegiance to the Brelish Crown by uncovering and 
defeating a plot to end the Treaty of Thronehold and 
reignite the Last War. 

A medal doesn't offer a specific in-game benefit to one 
who wears it, but it can affect dealings with MFCs, For 
example, a character who proudly displays the Golden 
Bear of Breland will be regarded as a hero of the people 
within the kingdom of Breland. Outside Breland, the 
medal carries far less weight, except among allies of 
Breland's king. 

Parcels of Land 

A parcel of land is just that* and usually comes with a 
royal letter affirming that the land has been granted as a 
reward for some service. Such land usually remains the 
property of the local ruler or ruling body, but is leased 
to a character with the understanding that it can be 
taken away, especially if his or her loyalty is ever called 
into question, 

A parcel of land, if sufficiently large, might have one or 
more farms or villages on it already, in which case the 
recipient is pronounced lord or lady of the land and is 
expected to collect taxes, along with any other duties, 

A character who receives a parcel of land is free to 
build on it and is expected to safeguard it. He or she may 
yito carry 
weapons in public places, kill enemies of the crown, or 
negotiate on a duke’s behalf. They might earn the right 
to demand free room and board from any establishment 
within a particular community, or have the right to draft 
local militia to assist them as needed. 

Special rights last only as long as the legal document 
dictates, and such rights can be revoked if the 
adventurers abuse them. 

Strongholds 

A stronghold is a reward usually given to seasoned 
adventurers who demonstrate unwavering fealty to a 
powerful political figure or ruling body, such as a king, 
a knighthood, or a council of wizards. A stronghold 
can be anything from a fortified tower in the heart of 
a city to a provincial keep on the borderlands. While 
the stronghold is for the characters to govern as they 
see fit, the land on which it sits remains the property of 
the crown or local ruler. Should the characters prove 
disloyal or unworthy of the gift, they can be asked or 
forced to relinquish custody of the stronghold. 


As an additional reward, the individual bequeathing 
the stronghold might offer to pay its maintenance costs 
for a period of one or more months, after which the 
characters inherit that responsibility. See chapter 6 for 
more information on stronghold maintenance. 

Titles 

A politically powerful figure has the ability to dispense 
titles. A title often comes with retired 
adventurer or champion who is willing to serve as a 
mentor. The trainer might be a reclusive wizard or 
haughty sorcerer who owes the queen a favor, the 
knight-commander of the King’s Guard, the leader of 
a powerful druid circle, a quirky monk who lives in a 
remote mountaintop pagoda, a barbarian chieftain, a 
warlock living among nomads as a fortune-teller, or an 
absentminded bard whose plays and poetry are known 
throughout the land. 

A character who agrees to training as a reward must 
spend downtime with the trainer (see chapter 6 for 
more information on downtime activities). In exchange, 
the character is guaranteed to receive a special benefit. 
Possible training benefits include the following: 

• The character gains inspiration daily at dawn for 

ld4 + 6 days. 

• The character gains proficiency in a skill. 

• The character gains a feat. 

Epic Boons 

An epic boon is a special power available only to 20th 
level characters. Characters at that level gain such 
boons only if you want them to and only when you feel 
it’s appropriate. Epic boons are best awarded after 
the characters complete a major quest, or accomplish 
something else particularly notable. A character might 
gain an epic boon after destroying an evil artifact, 
defeating an ancient dragon, or halting an incursion 
from the Outer Planes. 

Epic boons can also be used as a form ttack, you can 
choose to hit instead. Once you use this boon, you can't 
use it again until you finish a short rest. 

Boon of Dimensional Travel 

As an action, you can cast the misty step spell, without 
using a spell slot or any components. Once you do 
so, you can’t use this boon again until you finish a 
short rest. 

Boon of Fate 

When another creature that you can see within 60 feet 
of you makes an ability check, an attack roll, or a saving 
throw, you can roll a dlO and apply the result as a bonus 
or penalty to the roll. Once you use this boon, you can’t 
use it again until you finish a short rest. 

Boon of Fortitude 

Your hit point maximum increases by 40. 

Boon of High Magic 

You gain one 9th-level spell slot, provided that you 
already have one. 

Boon of Immortality 

You stop aging. You are immune to any effect that would 
age you. and you can’t die from old age. 

Boon of Invincibility 

When you take damage from any source, you can reduce 
that damage to 0. Once you use this boon, you can't use 
it again until you finish a short rest. 

Boon of Irresistible Offense 

You can bypass the damage resistances of any creature. 

Boon of Luck 

You can add a dlO roll to any ability check, attack roll, 
or saving throw you make. Once you use this boon, you 
can’t use it again until you finish a short rest. 

Boon of Magic Resistance 

You have advantage oonus action to take the 
Dash or Disengage action. Once you do so, you can’t dc 
so again until you finish a short rest. 

Boon of Spell Mastery 

Choose one Ist-level sorcerer, warlock, or wizard spell 
that you can cast. You can now cast that spell at its 
lowest level without expending a spell slot. 

Boon of Spell Recall 

You can cast any spell you know or have prepared 
without expending a spell slot. Once you do so, you can t 
use this boon again until you finish a long rest. 

Boon of the Fire Soul 

You have immunity to fire damage. You can also cast 
burning hands (save DC 15) at will, without using a spell 
slot or any components. 

Boon of the Night Spirit 
While completely in an area of dim light or darkness, 
you can become invisible as an action. You remain 
invisible until you take an action or a reaction. 

Boon of the Stormborn 
You have immunity to lightning and thunder damage. 
You can also cast thunderwave (save DC 15) at will, 
without using a spell slot or any components. 

Boon of the Unfettered 

You have advantage on ability checks made to resist 
being grappled. In addition, you can use an action 
to automatically escape a grapple or free yourself of 
restraints of any kind. 

Boon of Truesight 

You have truesight out to a range of 60 feet. 

Boon of Undetectability 
You gain a +10 bonus to Dexterity (Stealth) checks, and 
you can’t be detected or targeted by divination magic, 
including scrying sensors. 


CHAPTER 7 I TREASURE 



Master of Rules 































o 




















Chapter 8: Running the Game 


ULES ENABLE YOU AND YOUR PLAYERS TO HAVE 
fun at the table. The rules serve you, not vice 
versa. There are the rules of the game, and 
there are table rules for how the game is 
played. For instance, players need to know 
what happens when one of them misses a 
session. They need to know whether to bring 
miniatures. any special rules you've decided to use, and 
how to treat a cocked die (a die that lands so that its 
face can't be clearly read). These topics and more are 
covered in this chapter. 

Table Rules 

Ideally, players come to the gaming table with the same 
coal: to have a fun time together. This section gives 
recommendations for table rules you can establish to 
help meet that goal. Here are some fundamentals: 

Foster respect. Don't bring personal conflicts to the 
table or let disagreements escalate into bad feelings. 
Don't touch others' dice if they’re sensitive about it. 
Avoid distractions. Turn off the television and video 
games. If you have young children, hire a babysitter. 
Reducing distractions helps players stay in character 
and enjoy the story. It might be fine to have players 
wandering away from the table and back, but some 
players prefer planned breaks. 

e to keep the character alive and use 
resources wisely. 

• Run the character yourself. It's an extra burden for 
you. but it can work* 

* Decide the character isn't there. Invent a good reason 
for the character to miss the adventure, perhaps 

by having him or her linger in town or continue a 
downtime activity. Leave a way for the character to 
rejoin the party when the player returns* 

• Have the character fade into the background. This 
solution requires everyone to step out of the game 
world a bit and suspend disbelief, but might be the 
easiest solution. You act as if the character’s not there, 
but don’t try to come up with any in-game explanation 
for this absence* Monsters don't attack the character, 
who returns the favor* On returning, the player 
resumes playing as if he or she was never gone. 

Small Groups _ 

Most of the time* each player runs one character. 

The game plays best that way, without overwhelming 
anyone. But if your group is small, players can control 
more than one character. Or you can fill out the group 
with NPC followers, using the guidelines in chapter 4* 
“Creating Nonplayer Characters " You can also make 
the characters more resilient by using the healing surge 
option in chapter 9, "Dungeon Master's Workshop*” 

Don't force a reluctant player to take on multiple 
characters, and don’t show favoritism by allowing only 
onoup. 

- The new character is a prisoner of the foes the other 
characters are fighting. When rescued, this character 
joins their group. 

* The new character is the sole survivor of another 
adventuring group* 

The Role of Dice 

Dice are neutral arbiters. They can determine the 
outcome of an action w ithout assigning any motivation 
to the DM and without playing favorites. The extent 10 
which you use them is entirely up to you. 

Rolling with It 

Some DMs rely on die rolls for almost everything, Whe 
a character attempts a task, the DM calls for a check an 
picks a DC* As a DM using this style, you can't rely on 
the characters succeeding or failing on any one check 
to move the action in a specific direction* You must be 
ready to improvise and react to a changing situation. 

Relying on dice also gives the players the sense that 
anything is possible. Sure, it might seem unlikely that 
the party's halting can leap on the ogre's back* pull a 
sack over its head, and then dive to safety, but with a 
lucky enough roll it just might work. 

A drawback of this approach is that roleplaying 
can diminish if players feel that their die rolls, rather 
than their decisions and characterizations* always 
determine success. 

Ignoring the Dice_J 

One approach is to use dice as rarely as possible. Some 
DMs use them only during combat* and determine 
success or failure as they lik themselves in 
its world. 

Remember that dice don't run your 
game—you do. Dice are like rules. They’re 
tools to help keep the action moving. At any 
time, you can decide that a player's action is 
automatically successful. You can also grant 
the player advantage on any ability check, 
reducing the chance of a bad die roll foiling the 
character's plans. By the same token, a bad plan 
or unfortunate circumstances can transform the 
easiest task into an impossibility, or at least impose 
disadvantage. 

Using Ability Scores 9 

When a player wants to do something, its often 
appropriate to let the attempt succeed without a roll 
or a reference to the character's ability scores. For 
example, a character doesn't normally need to make 
a Dexterity check to walk across an empty room or a 
Charisma check to order a mug of ale* Only call for a 
roll if there is a meaningful consequence for failure. 

When deciding whether to use a roll, ask yourself two 
questions: 

* Is a task so easy and so free of conflict and stress that 
there should be no chance of failure? 

* Isa task so inappropriate or impossible—such as 
hitting the moon with an arrow—that it caiTt work? 

If the answer to both of these questions is no, some kind 
of roll is appropriate. The following sections provide 
guidance on determining whether to call for an ability 
check, attack roll, or saving throw;ard 
at a different gate* But you might decide that the in itial 
failure makes those checks more difficult to pull off. 



Ability Checks 


Ability 

Strength 

Dexterity 

Constitution 

Intelligence 

Wisdom 

Charisma 



Used for... 

Physical force and athleticism 
Agility, reflexes, and balance 
Stamina and health 
Memory and reason 
Perceptiveness and willpower 
Social influence and confidence 


■^L 


Example Uses 

Smash down a door, move a boulder, use a spike to wedge a door shut 
Sneak past a guard, walk along a narrow ledge, wriggle free from chains 
Endure a marathon, grasp hot metal without flinching, win a drinking contest 
Recall a bit of lore, recognize a clue’s significance, decode an encrypted message 
Spot a hidden creature, sense that someone is lying 

Persuade a creature to do something, cow a crowd, lie to someone convincingly 



CHAPTER 8 I RUNNING THE GAME 


2 'A? 




































Contests 

A contest is a kind of ability check t hat matches 
two creatures against each other. Use a contest if a 
character attempts something that either directly foils 
or is directly opposed by another creature's efforts. In a 
contest, the ability checks are compared to each other, 
rather than to a target number. 

When you call for a contest, you pick the ability that 
each side must use, deciding whether both sides use the 
same abilit can't be hedged out by armor or 
a shield. It’s up to you to decide which ability score is 
involved. The Saving Throws table offers suggestions. 


Intelligence Check vs. Wisdom Check 

If you have trouble deciding whether to cail for an intelli¬ 
gence or a Wisdom check to determine whether a character 
notices something, think of it in terms of what a very high or 
low score in those two abilities might mean. 

A character with a high Wisdom but low Intelligence is 
aware of the surroundings but is bad at interpreting what 
things mean. The character might spot that one section of 
a wall is clean and dusty compared to the others, but he or 
she wouldn't necessarily make the deduction that a secret 
door is there. 

In contrast, a character with high Intelligence and low 
Wisdom is probably oblivious but clever. The character might 
not spot the clean section of wall but, if asked about St, could 
immediately deduce why it f s dean. 

Wisdom checks allow characters to perceive what is 
around them (the wall is clean here), while Intelligence 
checks answer why things are that way (there's probably a 
secret door). 

q- W 


Saving Throws 

Ability 

Used For... 

Strength 

Opposing a force that would physically move 
or bind you 

Dexterity 

Dodging out of harm's way 

Constitution 

Enduring a disease, poison, or other hazard 
that saps vitality 

Intelligence 

Disbemoderate, or hard?" If the only DCs you ever use are 1C 
15, and 20, your game will run just fine. Keep in mind 
that a character with a 10 in the associated ability and 
no proficiency will succeed at an easy task around 50 
percent of the time, A moderate task requires a higher 
score or proficiency for success, whereas a hard task 
typically requires both. A big dose of luck with the d2Q 
also doesn't hurt, 

if you find yourself thinking, “This task Is especially 
hard/’ you can use a higher DC, but do so with caution 
and consider the level of the characters. A DC 25 task 
is very hard for low-level characters to accomplish, bin 
it becomes more reasonable after 10th level or so. A 
DC 30 check is nearly impossible for most low-level 
characters. A 20th4evel character with proficiency and 
relevant ability score of 20 still needs a 19 or 20 on the 
die roll to succeed at a task of this difficulty. 


C H \ PTE R8 I RUNNING V H E G A M E 


















Variant: Automatic Success 
Sometimes the randomness of a d20 rod leads to 
ludicrous results. Let's say a door requires a successful 
DC 15 Strength check to be battered down, A fighter 
with a Strength of 20 might helplessly Hail against the 
door because of bad die rolls. Meanwhile, the rogue with 
a Strength of 10 rolls a 20 and knocks the door from 
its hinges. 

If such results bother you, consider allowing 
autr 
whether a character could become better at a particular 
task through training and practice. If the answer is 
no, ids fine to say that no proficiency applies. But if 
the answer is yes. assign an appropriate skill or tool 
proficiency to reflect that training and practice. 

Skills 

As described in the Player's Handbook , a skill 
proficiency represents a character's focus on one 
aspect of an ability. Among all the things a character’s 
Dexterity score describes, the character might be 
particularly skilled at sneaking around, reflected in 
proficiency in the Stealth skill. When that skill is used 
for an ability check, it is usually used w ith Dexterity. 

Under certain circumstances, you can decide a 
character's proficiency in a skill can be applied to a 
different ability check. For example, you might decide 
that a character forced to swim from an island to the 
mainland must succeed on a Constitution check (as 
opposed to a Strength check) because of the distance 
involved. The character is proficient in the Athletics 
skill, which covers swimming, so you allow the 
character’s proficiency bonus to apply to this ability 


check. In effect, you're asking for a Constitution 
( Athletics) check, instead of a Strength (Athletics) check. 
Often, players ask w r hether they can apply a skill 
proficiency to an ability check. If a player can provide 
a good justificatses, you decide whether a circumstance influences a 
roll in one direction or another, and you gran? advantage 
or impose disadvantage as a result. 

Consider granting advantage w r hen 

* Circumstances not related to a creature's inherent 
capabilities provide it with an edge. 

* Some aspect of the environment contributes to the 
character s chance of success. 

* A player shows exceptional creativity or cunning in 
attempting or describing a task. 

* Previous actions (whether taken by the character 
making the attempt or some other creature) improve 
the chances of success. 

Consider imposing disadvantage when ... 

* Circumstances hinder success in some way. 

* Some aspect of the environment makes success less 
likely (assuming that aspect doesn’t already impose a 
penalty to the roll being made). 

* An element of the plan or description of an action 
makes success less likely. 

Because advantage and disadvantage cancel each 
other out, there's no need to keep track of bow many 
circumstances weigh on both sides. 


CM AFTER 8 | RUN N i N O T H E G A M F 














For example, imagine a wizard is running down a 
dungeon corridor to escape from a beholden Around 
the corner ahead, two ogres lie in wait* Does the wizard 
hear the ogres readying their ambush? You took at 
the wizard's passive Wisdom (Perception) score and 
consider all the factors weighing on it. e the game more 
exciting, amusing, or memorable* 

As a rule of thumb* aim to award inspiration to each 
character about once per session of play. Over time, you 
might want to award inspiration more or less often, at 
a rate that works best for your table. You might use the 
same rate for your entire DMing career, or you might 
change it with each campaign. 

Offering inspiration as a reward encourages certain 
types of behavior in your players* Think of your style as 
a DM and your group's preferences* What helps make 
the game more fun for your group? What type of actions 
fit in with your campaign's style or genre? Your answers 
to those questions help determine when you award 
inspiration, 

RoIepJaying* U si ng i nsp i ra t i on to re wa rd role play i ng 
is a good place to start for most groups. Reward a 
player with inspiration when that player causes his or 
her character to do something that is consistent with 
the characters personality trait, flaw, or bond* The 
character's action should be notable in some way. It 
might drive the story forward, push the adventurers inh 
danger, or make everyone at the table laugh. In essencr. 
you reward the player for roleplaying in a way that 
makes the game more enjoyable for everyone else. 

Take into account each player's roleplaying style* and 
try not to favor one style over another* For example, 
Allison might be comfortaard when 
[he characters achieve an important goal or victory, 
representing a surge of confidence and energy. 

Under this model, give everyone in the party 
inspiration if the characters manage to defeat a 
powerful foe, execute a cunning plan to achieve a 
goal or otherwise overcome a daunting obstacle in 
the campaign. 

Genre Emulation. Inspiration is a handy tool for 
reinforcing the conventions of a particular genre. 

Under this approach, think of the motifs of a genre as 
personality traits, flaws, and bonds that can apply to any 
of the adventurers. For example, in a campaign inspired 
bvfilm noir, characters could have an additional flaw: 

“I can't resist helping a person I fmd alluring despite 
warnings that he or she is nothing but trouble.” If the 
characters agree to help a suspicious but seductive 
noble and thereby become entangled in a web of intrigue 
and betrayal, reward them with inspiration. 

Similarly, characters in a horror story typically can’t 
help but spend a night in a haunted house to learn its 
secrets. They probably also go off alone when they 
shouldn’t, ff the party splits up, consider giving each 
character inspiration. 

A sensible person would avoid the noble s intrigues 
and the haunted house, but in film noir or horror, 
we re not dealing with sensible people; we re dealing 
with protagonists in a particular type of story. For th 
back and gives the players more freedom to do what 
they want. 

Telling a player that an action will earn inspiration 
provides clarity, but it can make it feel like you are 


manipulating the players or making choices for them. 
Offering inspiration before an action works great with 
groups that are comfortable with an emphasis on genre 
emulation and group storytelling, where character 
freedom isn't as important as weaving a compelling 
tale together. 

Start with awarding inspiration after an action, 
especially for your first campaign or when playing with 
a new group. That approach is the least disruptive to the 
flow of play and avoids making the players feel as if you 
are being manipulative. 

Tracking Inspiration 

A player typically notes on a character sheet whether 
he or she has inspiration, or you can use poker chips or 
some other token Alternatively, you can hand out special 
d20s to represent inspiration. When a player spends 
inspiration, lie or she rolls the die and then hands it 
back to you. If the player instead gives the inspiration to 
someone else, the d20 can go to that other person. 

Ignoring Inspiration 

Inspiration might not work for your campaign. Some 
DMs feel it adds a layer of metagame thinking, and 
others feel that heroism, roleplaying, and other parts 
of the game are their own rewards that don’t need 
incentives like inspiration. 

If you choose to ignore inspiration, you’re telling the 
players that your campaign is one where you let the 
dice fall where they may. It's a good option for gritty 
campaigns or ones where the DM focuses on playing an 
impartial role as a rules arbiter. 

Variant; Only Players Award Inspiration 

As a DM, you have a lot to track during the game. 
Sometimes you can lose track of inspiration and forget 
to award it. As a variant rule, you can allow the players 
to handle awarding inspiral ion entirely. During every 
session, each player can award inspiration to another 
player. A player follows whatever guidelines the group 
has agreed on for awarding inspiration. 

This approach makes your life easier and also gives 
players the chance to recognize each other for good 
play. You still need to make sure that inspiration is being 
awarded fairly. 

This approach works best with groups that are 
focused on the story. It falls flat if the players merely 
manipulate it to gain advantage in key situations, 
without earning inspiration by way of good roleplaying 
or whatever other criteria the group has established. 

In this variant, you can allow each player to award 
inspiration more than once per session. If you do so, the 
first time that a player awards inspiration in a session 
is free. Whenever that player awards it later in the same 
session, you gain inspiration that youyway white shrieking 
at the top of its lungs, alerting other nearby monsters. 

* A character manages to finish an arduous climb to the 
top of a cliff despite slipping, only to realize that the 
rope on which his companions dangle below him is 
close to breaking. 

When you introduce costs such as these, try to make 
them obstacles and setbacks that change the nature 
of the adventuring situation. In exchange for success, 
players must consider new ways of facing the challenge. 
You can also use this technique when a character 
succeeds on a roll by hitting the DC exactly, 
complicating marginal success in interesting ways. 

Degrees of Failure 

Sometimes a failed ability check has different 
consequences depending on the degree of failure. For 
example, a character who fails to disarm a trapped chest 
might accidentally spring the trap if the check fails by 
5 or more, whereas a lesser failure means that the trap 
wasn't triggered during the botched disarm attempt. 
Consider adding similar distinctions to other checks. 
Perhaps a failed Charisma (Persuasion) check means a 
queen won't help, whereas a failure of 5 or more means 
she throws you ip the dungeon for your impudence. 

Critical Success or Failure 
Rolling a 20 or a 1 on an ability check or a saving throw 
doesn't normally have any special effect. However, 
you can choose to take such an exceptional roll into 
acco


Map Scale 

Slow Pace 

Normal Pace 

Fast Pace 

Dungeon 
(1 sq. - 10 ft.) 

20 sq./min. 

30 sq./min. 

40 sq./min. 

City 

(1 sq. » 100 ft.) 

2 sq./min. 

3 sq./min. 

4 sq./min. 

Province 

2 hexes/hr., 

3 hexes/hr., 

4 hexes/hr, p 

(1 hex = 1 mi.) 

IS hexes/day 

24 hexes/day 

30 hexes/day 

Kingdom 

1 hex/3 hr, 

1 hex/2 hr,, 

1 hex/IVz hr., 

(1 hex = 6 mi.) 

3 hexes/day 

4 hexes/day 

5 hexes/day 


Special Travel Pace 

The rules on travel pace in the Player’s Handbook 
assume that a group of travelers adopts a pace that, over 
time, is unaffected by the individual members' walking 
speeds. The difference between walking speeds can 
be significant during combat, but during an overland 
journey, the difference vanishes as travelers pause to 
catch their breath, the faster ones wait for the slower 
ones, and one traveler’s quickness is matched by 
another traveler’s endurance. 

A character bestride a phantom steed, soaring 
through the air on a carpet of flying, or riding a sailboat 
or a steam-powered gnomish contraption doesn't travel 
at a normal rate, since the magic, engine, or wind 
doesn't tire the way a creature does and the air doesn’t 
contain the types of obstructions found on land. When a 
creature is traveling with a flying speed or with a speed 
granted by magic, an engine, or a natural force (such as 
wind or a water current), traneir view. 


Rain normally cuts maximum visibility down to 1 mile, 
and fog can cut it down to between 100 and 300 feet. 

On a clear day* the characters can see 40 miles if they 
are atop a mountain or a tall hill t or are otherwise able 
to look down on the area around them from a height. 

Noticing Ot her Cre ature s_ 

While exploring* characters might encounter oiher 
creatures. An important question in such a situation is 
who notices whom. 

Indoors* whether the sides can see one another 
usually depends on the configuration of rooms and 
passageways* Vision might also be limited by light 
sources. Outdoor visibility can be hampered by terrain* 
weather, and time of day. Creatures can be more likely 
to hear one another before they see anything. 

If neither side is being stealthy, creatures 
automatically notice each other once they are within 
sight or hearing range of one another. Otherwise* 
compare the Dexterity (Stealth) check results of the 
creatures in the group that is hiding with the passive 
Wisdom (Perception) scores of the other group* as 
explained in the Player's Handbook * 


chapter h 


RUNNING THE GAME 




















Tracking 


Adventurers sometimes choose their path by following 
the tracks of other creatures—or other creatures might 
track the adventurers! To track, one or more creatures 
must succeed on a Wisdom (Survival) check. You might 
require trackers to make a new check in any of the 
following circumstances: 

* They stop tracking and resume after finishing a short 
or long rest, 

- The trail crosses an obstacle, such as a river, that 
shows no tracks. 

- The weather conditions or terrain changes in a way 
that makes tracking harden 

The DC for the check depends on how r w r ell the ground 
shovvs signs of a creature’s passage. No roll is necessary 
in situations where the tracks are obvious. For example, 
no check is needed to track an army advancing along 
a muddy road. Spotting tracks on a bare stone floor is 
more challenging, unless the creature being tracked 
leaves a distinct trail. Additionally, the passage of time 
often makes tracks harder to follow. In a situation where 
there is no trail to follow', you can rule that tracking is 
impossible. 

The Tracking DCs table offers guidelines for setting 
the DC or, if you prefer, you can choose a DC based on 
your assessment of the difficulty. You can also grant 
advantage on the check if there's more than one set 
of tracks to follow, or disadvantage if the trail being 
followed passes through a well-trafficked area. 

On a failed check, the character loses the trail but can 
attempt to find it again by making a careful search of the 
area, it takes 10 minutes to find a trail in a confined area 
such as a dungeon, or 1 hour outdoors. 


Trackiners are interacting with: friendly, indifferent, 
or hostile, 

A friendly creature wants to help the adventurers 
and wishes for them to succeed. For tasks or actions 
that require no particular risk, effort, or cost, friendly 
creatures usually help without question. If an element : i 
persona! risk is involved, a successful Charisma check 
might be required to convince a friendly creature to take 
that risk. 

An indifferent creature might help or hinder the 
party, depending on what the creature sees as most 
beneficial A creature's indifference doesn't necessarih 
make it standoffish or disinterested. Indifferent 
creatures might be polite and genial, surly and irritable 
or anything in between. A successful Charisma check 
is necessary when the adventurers try to persuade an 
indifferent creature to do something, 

A hostile creature opposes the adventurers and their 
goals but doesn't necessarily attack them on sight. 

For example, a condescending noble might wish to 
see a group of upstart adventurers fail so as to keep 
them from becoming rivals for the king’s attention, 
thwarting them with slander and scheming rather thar 
direct threats and violence. The adventurers need to 
succeed on one or more challenging Charisma checks 
to convince a hostile creature to do anything on their 
behalf. That said, a hostile creature might be so ill- 
disposed toward the party ting on these 
characteristics, they first need to determine what the 
creature cares about- They can guess- but doing so runs 
the risk of shifting the creature’s attitude in the wrong 
d i re ct i o n if they gue ss bad ly. 

After interacting with a creature long enough to get 
a sense of its personality traits and characteristics 
through conversation- an adventurer can attempt a 
Wisdom (Insight) check to uncover one of the creature's 
characteristics. You set the DC. A check that fails by 
10 or more might misidentify a characteristic so you 
should provide a false characteristic or invert one of 
the creature's existing characteristics. For example, if 
an old sage's flaw is that he is prejudiced against the 
uneducated, an adventurer who badly fails the check 
might be told that the sage enjoys personally seeing to 
the education of the downtrodden. 

Given time, adventurers can also learn about a 
creature s characteristics from other sources, including 
its friends and allies, personal letters, and publicly told 
stories- Acquiring such information might be the basis 
of an entirely different set of social interactions. 

3, Charisma Check 

When the adventurers get to the point of their 
request, demand, or suggestion —or if you decide the 
conversation has run its course-call for a Charisma 
check. Any character who has actively participated in 
the conversation vertently says something 
counterproductive or offensive, the character making 
the Charisma check has disadvantage on that check. 

Multiple Cheeks . Certain situations might call for 
more than one check, particularly if the adventurers 
come into the interaction with multiple goals. 

4, Repeat? 

Once a Charisma check has been made, further 
attempts to influence the target of the interaction might 
be fruitless or run the risk of upsetting or angering the 
subject creature, potentially shifting its attitude toward 
hostility. Use your best judgment. For example, if the 
party's rogue says something that pushes a noble's 
attitude toward the party from indifferent to hostile, 
another character might be able to diffuse the noble's 
hostility with clever roleplaying and a successful 
Charisma (Persuasion) check. 

Role playing 

For some DMs, roleplaying comes naturally. If it doesn't 
come naturally for you, don't worry. The main thing is 
for you to have fun portraying your NPCs and monsters 
and to amuse your players in the process. You don’t 
need to be a practiced thespian or comedian to create 
drama or humor. The key is to pay attention to the story 
elements and characterizations that make your players 
laugh or feel emotionally engaged and to incorporate 
those things into your roleplaying. 

Being the NPC 

Imagine how a character or monster you bring to life 
would react to the adventurers. Consider what it cares 
about. Does it have any ideals, flaws, or bonds? By 
working such things into your portrayal, you not only 
make the character or monster more believable, but you 
also enhance the sense that the adventurers are in a 
living world. 

Strive for responses and actions that introduce twists 
into the game. For example, an old woman whose family 
was killed at the hands of an evil wizard might regard 
the party's wizard with grave suspicion. 

However you roleplay a character or monster, the 
classic advice for writers holds true: show, don’t tell. For 
example, rather than describe an NPC as shallow and 
self-centered, have the individual act the way you would 
expect a shallow, self-centered person to behave. The 
NPC might have off-the-cuff answers for everything, 
an over-willingness to share personal anecdotes, and a 
desperate need to make himself or herself the subject of 
every conversation. 

Using Your Voice 

Most of what you say during a session will be at a 
consistent level. For dramatic effect, be ready to shout 
out a battle cry or speak in a conspiratorial whisper. 


OH A PT U.R 8 ; R U N N I N G T H E G A M E 










Also, characters and monsters with distinctive voices 
are memorable* If you’re not a natural mimic or actor, 
borrowing distinctive speech patterns from real life, the 
movies, or television is a good place to start. Practice 
different voices and impersonations of famous people, 
then use those voices to bring your NPCs to life. 

Experiment with different speech patterns. For 
instance, a barmaid and a city magistrate probably use 
their words differently. Similarly, peasants could speak 
in earthy dialects, while rich folk talk in haughty drawls. 
Let a pirate N PC say, "Arrrr, maties!” in your best Long 
John Silver voice. Let intelligent monsters unfamiliar 
with Common stumble along with awkward grammar. 
Let drunkards and monsters mutter with slurred 
speech, while lizardfolk hiss their threats. 

In any interaction with multiple NPCs. make sure 
the adventurers remain the focus. Have the NPCs talk 
to them, not so much to each other. If possible, let one 
NPC do most of the talking, but if multiple NPCs need 
to talk, give them distinct voices so the players know 
who's who. 

Using Your Face and Arms 

Use your facial expressions to help show a character’s 
emotions. Scowl, smile, grin, snarl, pout, cross your 
eyes—do whatever it takes to make the character or 
monster memorable to the players. When you combine 
facial expressions with an unusual voice, a character 
truly comes to life. 

Though you don’t need to stand up out of your chair, 
you can use your arms to bring even more life to an 
NPC. A noble could chop the air with one hand whiles 
from NPCs, so they’re often easily engaged—though not 
always productively. 


Players who like to optimize their characters and 
slay monsters also like to argue, and having conflict 
within an interaction can help those players embrace 
roleplaying. Still, creating combat connections to an 
extended interaction (such as a corrupt vizier sending 
assassins to kill the adventurers) is often the best way 
keep action-focused players engaged. 

Target Specific Characters . Create situations where 
characters who might not otherwise be engaged with a 
social interaction have to do at least some of the talkie. 
Perhaps the NPC in question is a family member or 
a contact of a particular adventurer and talks only to 
that character. An NPC of a certain race or class might 
listen only to characters he or she feels a kinship with. 
Creating a sense of importance can be a great way to ge _ 
specific players engaged, but don't shut out players wh 
are already role playing. 

If a couple of players are dominating the conversation, 
take a moment now and then to involve the others. You 
can do this in character if you like: "And what about your 
hulking friend? Speak, barbarian! What will you pledge 
in exchange for my favor?' 1 Or just ask the player what 
his or her character is doing while the conversation is 
going on. The first approach is better for players who art 
already ce 

13 

Mitbral 

21 

Wood, bone 

Stone 

15 

17 

Adamantine 

23 


24 b 


C B A PIERS ! .R U N KING T ML G A M E 


Hit Points* An objects hit p ts — ^ how much 

damage it can take before losing ::s . era I integrity. 

Resilient objects have more hit: - - fragile ones. 
Large objects also tend to have m re hit r lints than 
small ones, unless breaking a small : mt of the object is 
just as effective as breaking ibe win >ie thing. The Object 
Hit Points table provides suggested hit points for fragile 
and resilient objects that are Large or smaller. 


Object Hit Points 


Size 

Fragile 

Resilient 

Tiny (bottle, lock) 

2 (ld4) 

5 (2d4) 

Small {chest, lute) 

3 (ld6) 

10 (3d6) 

Medium (barrel, chandelier) 

4 (IdS) 

18 (4d8) 

Large (cart, lO-ft.-by-10-ft. window) 

5 (IdlO) 

27 {SdlO) 


Huge and Gargantuan Objects . Normal weapons are 
of little use against many Huge and Gargantuan objects, 
such as a colossal statue, towering column of stone, or 
massive boulder. That said, one torch can burn a Huge 
tapestry, and an earthquake spell can reduce a colossus 
to rubble. You can track a Huge or Gargantuan object's 
h it points if you like, or you can simply decide how long 
the object can withstand whatever weapon or force is 
acting against it. If you track hit points for the object, 
divide it into Large or smaller sections, and track each 
section's hit ptrack 
of who goes when in combat. 

Hidden List 

Many DMs keep track of initiative on a list the players 
can't see: usually a piece of paper behind a DM screen 


r a spreadsheet on a tablet computer. This method 
allows you to keep track of combatants who haven’t been 
revealed yet, and you can use the initiative list as a place 
to record the current hit points of monsters, as well as 
other useful notes. 

A downside of this approach is that you have to remind 
the players round after round when their turns come up. 

Visible List 

You can use a whiteboard to track initiative. As the 
players tell you their initiative numbers, write them on 
the whiteboard in order from highest to lowest, leaving 
space between each name. Either write the monsters 1 
initiatives on the list at the same time or add them to the 
list on each monster's first turn. 

As a further improvement, use magnets that you can 
attach to a metal-based whiteboard with characters' and 
monsters' names written on them, or write those names 
on cards held in place by magnets. 

A visible list lets everyone see the order of play. 

Players know r when their turns are coming up, and they 
can start planning their actions in advance. A visible list 
also removes any uncertainty about when the monsters 
will act in the fight. 

A variation on the visible list is to give one player 
responsibility for keeping track of initiative, either on 
a whiteboard or on a piece of paper the other players 
can see. Phis method reduces the number of things you 
need to keep track of yourself. 

Index Cards 

In this approach, each character gets an index card, as 
does each group of identical monsters. When the players 
tell you their initiative numbers, write the numbers on 
their characters’ index cards. Do the same when you roll 
the monsters' initiative. Then arrange the cards in order 
from highest to lowest. Starting at the top, you move 
down through the stack. When you call out the name of 
the character whose turn it is, also mention who's next, 
prompting that player to start thinking ahead. After 
each character or group of monsters acts, the top card is 
moved to the bottom of the stack. 

At first, players don't know the order of play when 
you use combat cards, and they don't know where the 
monsters fall into the order until the monsters act. 

Tracking Monster Hit Points 

During a combat encounter, you need to track how much 
damage each monster takes. Most DMs track damage 
in secret so that their players don’t know how many hit 
points a monster has remaining. Whether you choose to 
be secretive or not is up to you. What's important is that 
every monster’s hit points be tracked individually. 

Tracking damage for one or two monsters isn't 
onerous, but it helps to havmbat: 

Ogre A: §9 %% 45 24 44 9 dead 
Ogre B: 59 54 30 
Ogre C: 59 

Players often ask how hurt a monster looks. Don't ever 
feel as though you need to reveal exact hit points, but if 
a monster is below half its hit point maximum* it's fair to 
say that it has visible wounds and appears beaten down. 
You can describe a monster taken Lo half its hit points as 
bloodied, giving the players a sense of progress in a fight 
against a tough opponent* and helping them judge when 
to use their most powerful spells and abilities. 


Using and Tracki ng Condit ions 

Various rules and features in the game are clear about 
when they apply a condition to a creature. You can als : 
apply conditions on the fly. They’re meant to be intuitu 
for you to do so. For example, if a character is in a star- 
such as sleep, that lacks consciousness, you can say 
the character is unconscious. Or did a character just 
stumble onto the ground? He or she is now prone. 

Keeping track of conditions can become tricky. 

For monsters* it’s often easiest to track conditions on 
combat cards or wherever you track initiative. Players 
should remember any conditions affecting their 
characters. Because players have incentive to forget or 
overlook hampering conditions* character conditions 
can also be marked on combat cards or a whiteboard. 

You might also try keeping a supply of index cards or 
hand, mteel 
blades, wading through a lava stream 

ISdlQ Being submerged in lava, being hit by a crashing 
flying fortress 

24dl0 Tumbling into a vortex of fire on the Elemental 

Plane of Fire, being crushed in the jaws of a godlike 
creature or a moon-sized monster 

The Damage Severity and Level table is a guide to 
how deadly these damage numbers are for characters 
of various levels. Cross-reference a character s level 
with the damage being dealt to gauge the severity of 
the damage. 


In contrast* dangerous damage values pose a 
significant threat to weaker characters and could 
potentially kill a character of the level shown if that 
character is missing many hit points. 

As the name suggests, deadly damage is enough 
to drop a character of the level shown to 0 bit points* 
This level of damage can kill even powerful characters 
outright if they are already wounded. 

Adjudicating Areas of Effect 

Many spells and other game features create areas of 
effect, such as the cone and the sphere. If you’re not 
using miniatures or another visual aid, it can sometimes 
be difficult to determine who’s in an area of effect and 
who isn't. The easiest way to address such uncertainty 
is to go with your gut and make a call. 

If you would like more guidance, consider using 
the Targets in Areas of Effect table. To use the table, 
imagine which combatants are near one another, and

This approach aims at simplicity instead of spatial 
precision. If you prefer more tactical nuance, consider 
using miniatures. 

Handling Mobs 


Keeping combat moving along at a brisk pace can be 
difficult when there are dozens of monsters involved 
in a battle. When handling a crowded battlefield, you 
can speed up play by forgoing attack rolls in favor of 
approximating the average number of hits a large group 
of monsters can inflict on a target. 

Instead of rolling an attack roll, determine the 
minimum d20 roll a creature needs in order to hit a 
target by subtracting its attack bonus from the target's 
AC. You’ll need to refer to the result throughout the 
battle, so it’s best to write it down. 

Lookup the minimum d20 roll needed on the Mob 
Attacks table. The table shows you how many creatures 
that need that die roll or higher must attack a target 
in order for one of them to hit. If that many creatures 
attack the target, their combined efforts result in one of 
them hitting the target. 

For example, eight ores surround a fighter. The ores’ 
attack bonus is +5, and the fighter’s AC is 19, The ores 
need a 14 or higher to hit the fighter. According to the 
table, for every three ores that attack the fighter, one 
of them hits. There are enough ores for two groups of 
three. The remaining two ores fail to hit the fighter. 

If the attacking creatures dealt with 1-inch squares, on a large she 
of paper, or on a similar flat surface. Preprinted poster- 
sized maps, maps assembled from cardboard tiles, ar 1 
terrain made of sculpted plaster or resin are also fur. 

The most common unit for tactical maps is the 5-f< 
square, and maps with grids are readily available and 
easy to create. However, you don’t have to use a grid a: 
all. You can track distances with a tape measure, string 
craft sticks, or pipe cleaners cut to specific lengths. 
Another option is a play surface covered by 1-inch 
hexagons (often called hexes), which combines the easy 
counting of a grid with the more flexible movement of 
using no grid. Dungeon corridors with straight walls 
and right angles don’t map easily onto hexes, though 


Flashing (Squares) 


Half Cover (Squares) 


Three-Quarters Cover (Square! 

























I 




Creature Size on Squares and Hexes 

A creature’s size determines how much space it 
occupies on squares or hexes, as shown in the Creature 
Size and Space table* If the miniature you use for a 
monster takes up an amount of space different from 
what’s on the table, that’s fine, but treat the monster 
as its official size for all other rules. For example, 
you might use a miniature that has a Large base to 
represent a Huge giant. That giant takes up less space 
on the battlefield than its size suggests, but iry 
corner of any one square the target occupies. If one or 
two of those lines are blocked by an obstacle (including 
another creature), the target has half cover. If three or 
four of ihose lines are blocked but the attack can still 
reach the target (such as when the target is behind an 
arrow slit), the target has three-quarters coven 
On hexes, use the same procedure as a grid* drawing 
lines between the corners of the hexagons. The target 
has half cover if up to three lines are blocked by an 
obstacle, and three-quarters cover if four or more lines 
are blocked but the attack can still reach the target. 

Optional Rule: Flanking 

If you regularly use miniatures, flanking gives 
combatants a simple way to gain advantage on attack 
rolls against a common enemy* 

A creature can’t flank an enemy that it can t see, A 
creature also can’t hank while it is incapacitated. A 
Large or larger creature is flanking as long as at least 
one square or hex of its space qualifies for flanking. 
Flanking on Squares. When a creature and at 
least one of its allies are adjacent to an enemy a nd on 
opposite sides or corners of the enemy's space, they 
flank that enemy, and each of them has advantage on 
melee attack roils against that enemy* 

When in doubt about whether two creatures flank 
an enemy on a grid, trace an imaginary line between 
the centers of the creatures’ spaces. n 
of 5 feet and then 10 feet continues whenever you're 
counting diagonally, even if you move horizontally or 
vertically between different bits of diagonal movement. 
For example, a character might move one square 
diagonally (5 feet), then three squares straight (15 feet), 
and then another square diagonally (10 feet) for a total 
movement of 30 feet. 

Optional Rule: Facing 

If you want the precision of knowing which way a 
creature is facing* consider using this optional rule. 

Whenever a creature ends its move, it can change its 
facing. Each creature has a front arc (the direction it 
faces), left and right side arcs, and a rear are, A creature 
can also change its facing as a reaction when any other 
creature moves, 

A creature can normally target only creatures in its 
front or side arcs. It can t see into its rear arc. This 
means an attacker in the creature's rear arc makes 
attack rolls against it with advantage. 

Shields apply their bonus to AC only against attacks 
from the front arc or the same side arc as the shield. For 
example, a fighter with a shield on the left arm can use it 
only against attacks from the front and left arcs. 

Feel free to determine that not all creatures have 
every type of arc. For example, an amorphous ochre 
jelly could treat all of its arcs as front ones, while a 
hydra might have three front arcs and one rear one. 

On squares, on. For example, the opportunity attack and 
the shield spell are clear about the fact that they can 
interrupt their triggers. If a reaction has no timing 
specified, or the timing is unclear, the reaction occurs 
~jer its trigger finishes, as in the Ready action. 



Chases 


Strict application of the movement rules can turn a 
potentially exciting chase into a dull, predictable affair 
Faster creatures always catch up to slower ones, while 
creatures with the same speed never close the distance 
between each other. This set of rules can make chases 
more exciting by introducing random dements. 

Beginning a Chase 

A chase requires a quarry and at least one pursuer. Any 
participants not already in initiative order must roll 
initiative. As in combat, each participant in the chase 
can take one action and move on its turn. The chase 
ends when one side drops out or the quarry escapes. 

When a chase begins, determine the starting 
distance between the quarry and the pursuers. Track 
the distance between them, and designate the pursuer 
closest to the quarry as the lead. The lead pursuer migi 
change from round to round. 

Running the Chase 

Participants in the chase are strongly motivated to use 
the Dash action every round. Pursuers who stop to cas- 
spells and make attacks run the risk of losing their 
quarry, and a quarry that does so is likely to be caught. 

Dashing 
ealth) check at the end of each round, after 
every participant in the chase has taken Its turn. The 
result is compared to the passive Wisdom Perception) 
scores of the pursuers, If the quarry consists of multiple 
creatures* they all make the check* 

If the quarry is never out of the lead pursuer's sight* 
the check fails automatically. Otherwise, If the result of 
the quarry’s check Is greater than the highest passive 
score, that quarry escapes. If not, the chase continues 
for another round. 

The quarry gains advantage or disadvantage on its 
check based on prevailing circumstances, as shown in 
the Escape Factors table. If one or more factors give the 
quarry both advantage and disadvantage on its check, 
the quarry has neither, as usual. 

Escape Factors 

Check Has „. 
Advantage 
Advantage 
Disadvantage 
Disadvantage 
Disadvantage 

proficiency in survival 

Other factors might help or hinder the quarry’s ability 
to escape* at your discretion* For example* a quarry with 
a faerie fire spell cast on it might have disadvantage on 
checks made to escape because it’s much easier to spot. 

Escape doesn't necessarily mean the quarry has 
outpaced its pursuers. For example, in an urban 
setting, escape might mean the quarry ducked into a 
crowd or slipped around a corner, leaving no clue as to 
where it went. 


Factor 

Quarry has many things to hide behind 
Quarrke your way through the crowd 
unimpeded. On a failed check, the crowd counts as 
TO feet of difficult terrain. 

3 A large stained-glass window or similar barrier 
blocks your path. Make a DC 10 Strength saving 
throw to smash through the barrier and keep going. 
On a failed save, you bounce off the barrier and fall 
prone, 

4 A maze of barrels, crates, or similar obstacles stands 
in your way. Make a DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) 

or Intelligence check (your choice) to navigate the 
maze. On a failed check, the maze counts as 10 feet 
of difficult terrain, 

5 The ground beneath your feet is slippery with rain, 
spilled oil, or some other liquid. Make a DC 10 
Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, you fall 
prone. 

6 You come upon a pack of dogs fighting over food. 
Make a DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check to get 
through the pack unimpeded, On a failed check, you 
are bitten and take ld4 piercing damage, and the 
dogs count as 5 feet of difficult terrain, 

7 You run into a brawl in progress. Make a DC 15 
Strength (Athletics), Dexterity (Acrobatics), or 
Charisma (Intimidation) check (your choice) to get 
past the brawlers unimpeded. On a failed check, 
you take 2d4 bludgeoning damage, and the brawlers 
count as 10 feet of difficult terrain. 

8 A beggar blocks your way. Make a DC 10 Strength 
(Athletics), Dexterity (Acrobatics), or Charisma 
(Intimidation) check (yohit). 

4 A stream, ravine, or rock bed blocks your path. Make 
a DC 10 Strength (Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics 
check (your choice) to cross the impediment. On a 
failed check, the impediment counts as 10 feet of 
difficult terrain. 

5 Make a DC 10 Constitution saving throw. On a faiier 
save, you are blinded by blowing sand, dirt, ash, 
snow, or pollen until the end of your turn. While 
blinded in th is way, your speed is halved. 

6 A sudden drop catches you by surprise. Make 
a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw to navigate the 
impediment. On a failed save, you fall 1d4 x 5 feet, 
taking 1d6 bludgeoning damage per 10 feet fallen as 
normal, and land prone. 

7 You blunder into a hunter's snare. Make a DC 15 
Dexterity saving throw to avoid it. On a failed save 
you are caught in a net and restrained. See chapter! 
H Equipment,” of the Payer's Handbook for rules on 
escaping a net. 

8 You are caught in a stampede of spooked animals. 
Make a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw. On a 
failed save, you are knocked about and take ld4 
bludgeoning damage and 1d4 piercing damage. 

9 Your path takes you near a patch of razorvine. Make 
a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or use 10 feet of 
movement (your choice) to avoid the razorvine. O r a 
failed save, you take IdlO slashing damage. 

10 A creature indigenous to the area chases after you. 
The DM chooses a creature appropriate for thehave many 
branches, depending on the nature of the chase. For 
example, a mine cart chase might have few (if any) 
branches, while a sewer chase might have several. 

Role Reversal 

During a chase, it's possible for the pursuers to become 
the quarry. For example, characters chasing a thief 
through a marketplace might draw unwanted attention 
from other members of the thieves' guild. As they 
pursue the fleeing thief, they must also evade the thieves 
pursuing them. Roll initiative for the new arrivals, and 
run both chases simultaneously. In another scenario, 
the fleeing thief might run into the waiting arms of his 
accomplices. The outnumbered characters might decide 
to flee with the thieves in pursuit. 

Siege Equipment 

Siege weapons are designed to assail castles and other 
walled fortifications. They see much use in campaigns 
that feature war. Most siege weapons don’t move around 
a battlefield on their own; they require creatures to move 
them, as well as to load, aim, and fire them. 

Ballista 
Large object 

Armor Class: 15 
Hit Points: 50 

Damage Immunities: poison, psychic 

A ballista is a massive crossbow that fires heavy bolts. 
Before it can be fired, it must be loaded and aimed. It 
takes one action to load the weapon, one action to aim it. 
and one action to fire it. 

Bolt Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 120/480 
ft., one target. Hit: 16 (3d 1successful one. 

Mangonel 
Large object 

Armor Class: 15 
Hit Points: 100 

Damage Immunities: poison, psychic 

A mangonel is a type of catapult that hurls heavy 
projectiles in a high arc. This payload can hit targets 
behind cover. Before the mangonel can be fired, it must 
be loaded and aimed. It takes two actions to load the 
weapon, two actions to aim It, and one action to fire it, 

A mangonel typically hurls a heavy stone, although it 
can hurl other kinds of projectiles, w ith different effects. 
Mangonel Stone * Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit. 
range 200/800 ft. (can’t hit targets within 60 feet of it), 
one target Hit: 27 (5dl0) bludgeoning damage. 

Ram 

Large object 

Armor Class; 15 
Hit Points: 100 

Damage Immunities: poison, psychic 

A ram consists of a movable gallery equipped w ith a 
heavy log suspended from two roof beams by chains. 
The log is shod in iron and used to batter through doors 
and barricades. 

It takes a minimum of four Medium creatures to 
operate a ram. Because of the gallery roof, these 
operators have total cover against attacks from above. 

Ram. Melee l Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
object. Hit: 16 (3d 10) bludgeoning damage. 


Ct E A PTFJR 8 I RUNNING TH E GA VI L 








Siege Tower 
Gargantuan object 

Armor Class: 15 
Hit Points: 200 

Damage Immunities: poison, psychic 

A siege tower is a mobile wooden strucsmall drain on party resources, curable by a casting 
of lesser restoration. A more complicated outbreak can 
form the basis of one or more adventures as characters 
search for a cure, stop the spread of the disease, and 
deal with the consequences. 

A disease that does more than infect a few party 
members is primarily a plot device. The rules help 
describe the effects of the disease and how it can be 
cured, but the specifics of how a disease works aren't 
bound by a common set of rules. Diseases can affect 
any creature, and a given illness might or might not 
pass from one race or kind of creature to another. A 
plague might affect only constructs or undead, or sweep 
through a halfling neighborhood but leave other races 
untouched. What matters is the story you want to tell 

Sample Diseases _ 

The diseases here illustrate the variety of ways disease 
can work in the game. Feel free to alter the saving 
throw DCs, incubation times, symptoms, and other 
characteristics of these diseases to suit your campaign. 






























C\CKLE Fever 

“ is disease targets humanoids, although gnomes are 
sirangely immune. While in the grips of this disease* 
jetims frequently succumb to fits of mad laughter. 

: ving the disease its common name and its morbid 
kname: "‘the shrieks. 1 ’ 

5 ymptoms mani fest 1 d4 hou rs after infection ancl 
include fever and disoneric term for a broad category 
of illnesses that incubate in sewers, refuse heaps, 
and stagnant swamps, and which are sometimes 
transmitted by creatures that dwell in those areas, such 
as rats and otyughs. 

When a humanoid creature is bitten by a creature that 
carries the disease* or when it comes into contact with 
filth or offal contaminated by the disease* the creature 
must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or 
become infected. 

it takes 1 d4 days for sewer plague's symptoms to 
manifest in an infected creature. Symptoms include 
fatigue and cramps. The infected creature suffers one 
level of exhaustion, and it regains only half the normal 
number of hit points from spending Hit Dice and no hit 
points from finishing a long rest. 

At the end of each long rest, an infected creature 
must make a DC 11 Constitution saving throw. On a 
failed save, the character gains one level of exhaustion* 
On a successful save, the character s exhaustion level 
decreases by one level. If a successful saving throw 
reduces the infected creatures level of exhaustion below 
1* the creature recovers from the disease* 

Sight Rot 

This painful infection causes bleeding from the eyes and 
eventually blinds the victim* 


A beast or humanoid that drinks water tainted by 
sight rot must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving 
throw or become infected. One day after infection, tature that takes slashing or piercing 
damage from a weapon or piece of ammunition coated 
with injury poison is exposed to its effects. 


Poisons 


Item 

Type 

Price per Dose 

Assassin's blood 

Ingested 

150 gp 

Burnt othur fumes 

Inhaled 

500 gp 

Carrion crawler mucus 

Contact 

200 gp 

Drew poison 

Injury 

200 gp 

Essence of ether 

Inhaled 

300 gp 

Malice 

Inhaled 

250 gp 

Midnight tears 

Ingested 

1.500 gp 

Oil of taggit 

Contact 

400 gp 

Pale tincture 

Ingested 

250 gp 

Purple worm poison 

Injury 

2,000 gp 

Serpent venom 

Injury 

200 gp 

Torpor 

Ingested 

600 gp 

Truth serum 

Ingested 

150 gp 

Wyvern poison 

Injury 

1.200 gp 


Sample Poisons _ 

Each type of poison has its own debilitating effects* 
Assassin's Blood (Ingested). A creature subjected 
to this poison must make a DC 10 Constitution saving 
throw. On a failed save, it takes 6 (Idl 2) poison damage 


C, HA PTE RS l It U N N I N G TH E GAME 










































and is poisoned for 24 hours. On a successful save, the 
creature takes half damage and isn’t poisoned. 

Burnt Othur Fumes (Inhaled). A creature subjected 
to this poison must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution 
saving throw or take 10 (3d6) poison damage, and must 
repeat the saving throw at the start of each of its turns. 
On each successive failed save, the character takes 3 
(kI6) poi 
this poison suffers no effect until the stroke of midnight 
If the poison has not been neutralized before then, the 
creature must succeed on a DC 17 Constitution saving 
throw, taking 31 (9d6) poison damage on a failed save, 
or half as much damage on a successful one. 

Oil of Taggit (Contact) L A creature subjected to this 
poison must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving 
throw or become poisoned for 24 hours. The poisoned 
creature is unconscious. The creature wakes up if it 
takes damage. 

Pale Tincture (Ingested). A creature subjected to this 
poison must succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving 
throw or take 3 (ld6) poison damage and become 
poisoned. The poisoned creature must repeat the saving 
throw every 24 hours, taking 3 (ld6) poison damage 
on a failed save. Until this poison ends, the damage 
the poison deals can t be healed by any means. After 
seven successful saving throws, the effect ends and the 
c re atu re can hea I n or m a 1 ly. 

Purple Worm Poison (Injury). This poison must be 
harvested from a dead or incapacitated purple worm. 

A creature subjected to this poison must make a 3 )C 
19 Constitution saving throw, taking 42 (12d6) poison 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 


Serpent Venom (Injury). This poison must be 
harvested from a dead or incapacitated giant poisonous 
snake. A creature subjected to this poiter 
can use the crafting rules in the Players Handbook to 
create basic poison if the character has proficiency with 
a poisoner s kit. At your discretion, the character can 
craft other kinds of poison. Not all poison ingredients 
are available for purchase, and tracking down certain 
ingredients might form the basis of an entire adventure. 

A character can instead attempt to harvest poison 
from a poisonous creature, such as a snake, wyvern, or 
carrion crawler. The creature must be incapacitated or 
dead, and the harvesting requires ld6 minutes followed 
by a DC 20 Intelligence (Nature) check. (Proficiency 
with the poisoner's kit applies to this check if the 
character doesn't have proficiency in Nature.) On a 
successful check, the character harvests enough poison 
for a single dose. On a failed check, the character is 
unable to extract any poison. If the character fails the 
check by 5 or more, the character is subjected to the 
creatures poison. 

Madness 

In a typical campaign, characters aren’t driven mad 
by the horrors they face and the carnage they inflict 
day after day, but sometimes the stress of being an 
adventurer can be too much to bear. If your campaign 
has a strong horror theme, you might want to use 
madness as a way to reinforce that theme, emphasizing 


CHAPTLft 8 I RI.■ NN1 NO THVi GAME 












the extraordinarily horrific nature of the tShort-Term Madness 

d 100 Effect (lasts IdTO minutes) 

01-20 The character retreats into his or her mind and 

becomes paralyzed. The effect ends if the character 
takes any damage, 

21-30 The character becomes incapacitated and spends 
the duration screaming, laughing, or weeping. 

31-40 The character becomes frightened and must use 
his or her action and movement each round to flee 
from the source of the fear. 

41-50 The character begins babbling and is incapable of 
normal speech or spellcasting, 

51-60 The character must use his or her action each 
round to attack the nearest creature. 

61-70 The character experiences vivid hallucinations and 
has disadvantage on ability checks. 

71-75 The character does whatever anyone tells him or 
her to do that isn't obviously self-destruct ve. 

76-80 The character experiences an overpower ng urge to 
eat something strange such as dir: s! me, or offal. 
81-90 The character is stunned. 

91-100 The character falls unconscious 




































Long-Term Madness 

dlQO Effect (lasts tdIO x10 hours) 

01-10 The character feels compelled to repeat a specific 
activity over and over, such as washing hands, 
touching things, praying, or counting coins. 

11-20 The character experiences vivid hallucinations and 
has disadvantage on ability checks, 

21-30 The character suffers extreme paranoia. The 
character has dharacter. 

Curing Madness _ 

A calm emotions spell can suppress the effects of 
madness, while a lesser restoration spell can rid 
a character of a short-term or long-term madness. 
Depending on the source of the madness* remove 
curse or dispel evil might also prove effective. A greater 
restoration spell or more powerful magic is required to 
rid a character of indefinite madness. 

Experience Points 

Experience points (XP) fuel level advancement for 
player characters and are most often the reward for 
completing combat encounters. 

Each monster has an XP value based on its 
challenge rating. When adventurers defeat one or more 
monsters—typically by killing, routing, or capturing 


Indefinite Madness 

d 100 Flaw (lasts until cured) 

01-15 "Being drunk keeps me sane." 

16-25 "3 keep whatever I find.” 

26-30 "I try to become more like someone else I know— 
adopting his or her style of dress, mannerisms, 
and name." 

31-35 "1 must bend the truth, exaggerate, or outright lie 

to be interesting to other people;" 

36-45 "Achieving my goal is the only thing of interest to 
me, and 111 ignore everything else to pursue it.’ 1 

46-50 "I find it hard to care about anything that goes on 
around me.” 

51-55 "I don’t like the way people judge me ail the time." 

56-70 "1 am the smartest, wisest, strongest, fastest, and 

most beautiful person I know." 

71-80 "Ihe game, and keeping up with the rest of the party is 
good incentive for players to attend as many sessions 
as possible. 

As an alternative* give absent characters the same 
XP that the other characters earned each session, 
keeping the group at the same level* Few players 
will intentionally miss out on the fun of gaming just 
because they know they'll receive XP for it even if they 
don't show up. 


C11APTER 8 I RU NN1NC THF, GAM£ 


















* The adventurers gain the benefit of a short rest. 

* Characters can recover a Hit Die or a low-level 
spell slot. 

* Characters can regain the use of magic items that 
have had their limited uses expended. 


Level Advancement without XP 


2 b 


You can also award XP when characters complete 
significant milestones. When preparing your adventure, 
designate certain events or challenges as milestones, as 
with the following examples: 

* Accomplishing one in a series of goals necessary to 
complete the adventu re. 

* Discovering a hidden location or piece of information 
relevant to the adventure. 

< Reaching an important destination. 


When awarding XP, treat a major milestone as a hard 
encounter and a minor milestone as an easy encounter. 

If you want to reward your players for their progress 
through an adventure with something more than XP 
and treasure, give them additional small rewards at 
milestone points. Hr of the same difficulty, but only 
if the encounter involved a meaningful risk of failure. 

Milestones 


Story- Based Advancement 

When you let the story of the campaign drive 
advancements you award levels when adventurers 
accomplish significant goals in the campaign. 


C T-l A PTE k a I IUJ N NI NO TH E O AM K 






















































Chapter 9: Dungeon Master s Workshop 


s the Dungeon Master, you aren't limited 
by the rules in the Player's Handbook t the 
guidelines in this book, or the selection of 
monsters in the Monster Manual You can 
let your imagination run wild. This chapter 
contains optional rules that you can use to 
customize your campaign, as well as guidelines on 
creating your own material, such as monsters and 
magic items. 

The options in this chapter relate to many different 
parts of the game. Some of them are variants of 
rules, and others are entirely new rules. Each option 
represents a different genre, style of play, or both. 
Consider trying no more than one or two of the options 
at a time so that you can clearly assess their effects on 
your campaign before adding other options. 

Before you add a new rule to your campaign, ask 
yourself two questions: 

* Will the rule improve the game? 

* Wi 11 my p 1 ayers like it? 


If you're confident that the answer to both questions is 
yes. then you have nothing to loption is intended for player characters and 
nonplayer characters who have levels, as opposed to 
monsters who don't. 


Proficiency Die 


Level 

Proficiency Bonus 

Proficiency Die 

1 st-4th 


1d4 

Sth—Sth 

+3 

ld6 

9th—12th 

h-4 

ids 

13th—16th 

+5 

IdlO 

17th-20th 

+6 

ld!2 


Skill Variants 


A skill dictates the circumstances under which a 
character can add his or her proficiency bonus to an 
ability check. Skills define those circumstances by 
referring to different aspects of the six ability scores. 

For example. Acrobatics and Stealth are two different 
aspects of Dexterity, and a character can specialize in 
either or both. 

You can dispense w ith skills and use one of the 
following variants. Choose whichever one best suits 
your campaign. 

Ability Check Proficiency 

With this variant rule, characters don't have skill 
proficiencies. Instead, each character has proficiency 
in two abilities: one tied to the character’s class and 
one tied to the character's background. The Ability 
Proficiencies by Class table suggests a proficiency for 
each class, and you choose which ability is tied to a 
given background. Starting at 1st level, a character adds 
his or her proficiency bonus to any ability check tied to 
one or the other of these two abilities. 


Ability Check Proficiencies by Class 


Gass 

Barbarian 

Bard 

Cleric 

Druid 

Fightad, 
a character can add his or her proficiency bonus to any 
ability check to which the character's prior training and 
experience (reflected in the characters background) 
reasonably applies. The DM is the ultimate judge of 
whether the character's background applies. 

For example, the player of a character with the noble 
background could reasonably argue that the proficiency 
bonus should apply to a Charisma check the character 
makes to secure an audience with the king. The player 
should be encouraged to explain in specific terms how 
(he character’s background applies. Not simply Tm 
a noble,'' but "1 spent three years before starting my 
adventuring career serving as my family's ambassador 
to the court, and this sort of thing is second nature 
to me now," 

This simple system relies heavily on players 
developing their characters' histories. Don’t let it 
result in endless debates about whether a character's 
proficiency bonus applies in a given situation. Unless 
a player’s attempt to explain the relevance of the 
character's background makes everyone else at the table 
roll their eyes at its absurdity, go ahead and reward the 
player for making the effort. 

If a character has the Expertise feature, instead 
of choosing skills and tools to gain the benefit of 
that feature, the player defines aspects of his or her 
background to which the benefit applies. Conter instead 
gains a new positive personality trait. 

This system relies heavily on players developing 
their characters’ personalities. Make sure that different 
characters' traits—positive and negative—come into pla> 
with about the same frequency. Don't let a player get 
away with a positive trait that always seems to apply and 
a negative trait that never does. 

At your discretion, you can also tie a character s 
ideals, bonds, and (laws to this system. 

Hero Points 

Hero points work well in epic fantasy and mythic 
campaigns in which the characters arc meant to be 
more like superheroes than the average adventurer is. 

With this option, a character starts with 5 hero points 
at 1st level. Each time the character gains a level* he or 
she loses any unspent hero points and gains a new torn! 
equal to 5 + half the character's level. 

A player can spend a hero point whenever he or she 
makes an attack roll, an ability check, or a saving throw 
The player can spend the hero point after the roll is 
made but before any of its results are applied. Spending 
the hero point allows the player to roll a d6 and add it 
to the d2Q. possibly turning a failure into a success. A 
player can spend only 1 hero point per roll. 

In addition, whenever a character fails a death saving 
throw, the player can spend one hero point to turn the 
failure into a success. 

New Ability Scorcharacters devotion to a 
code but also the character's understanding of it. The 
Honor score can also reflect how others perceive a 
character’s honor. A character with a high Honor usually 
has a reputation that others know about, especially 
those who have high Honor scores themselves. 

Unlike other abilities. Honor can't be raised with 
normal ability score increases. Instead, you can award 
increases to Honor—or impose reductions—based on 
a character’s actions. At the end of an adventure, if you 
think a character's actions in the adventure reflected 
well or poorly on his or her understanding of the code, 
you can increase or decrease the character’s Honor by 
1. As with other ability scores, a character’s Honor can't 
exceed 20 or fall below 1, 

Honor Checks. Honor checks can be used in social 
situations, much as Charisma would, when a characters 
understanding of a code of conduct is the most defining 
factor in the way a social interaction will play out. 

You might also call for an Honor check when a 
character is in one of the following situations; 

* Being unsure how to act with honor 

* Su rrenderi ng whi !e t ryi ng to save face 

» Trying to determine another character's Honor score 

* Trying to use the proper etiquette in a delicate 
social situation 

* Using his or her honorable or dishonorable reputation 
to influence someone else 

Honor ness 

* Comprehending a piece of alien magic foreign to all 
normal understanding of magic 


Sanity Saving Throws. You might call for a Sanity 
saving throw when a character runs the risk of 
succumbing to madness, such as in the following 
situations: 

- Seeing a creature from the Far Realm or other alien 
realms for the first time 

* Making direct contact with the mind of an 
alien creature 

- Being subjected to spells that affect mental stability, 
such as the insanity option of the symbol spell 

* Passing through a demiplane built on alien physics 

* Resisting an effect conferred by an attack or spell that 
deals psychic damage 



2G5 



OH A PT E R 9 I DUN C L U N M A STER'S WQRKSH O P 











£66 


CHAPTER 9 I DUNGEON MASTER'S WORKSHOP 



A failed Sanity save might result in short-term, long¬ 
term, or indefinite madness, as described in chapter 8, 
“Running the Game/ Any time a character suffers Iron 
long-term or indefinite madness, the character's Sanity 
is reduced by 1. A greater restoration spell can restore 
Sanity lost in this way, and a character can increase his 
or her Sanity through level advancement. 

Adventuring Options 

This section provides options for changing how rests 
work,, as well as for adding unusual things to your 
campaign, such as modern weapons. 

Fear and Horror 

The rules for fear and horror can help you sustain an 
atmo bandage and treat the character's wounds. 

Healing Surges 

This optional rule allows characters to heal up in 
the thick of combat and works well for parties that 
feature few or no characters with healing magic, or for 
campaigns in which magical healing is rare. 

As an action, a character can use a healing surge and 
spend up to half his or her Hit Dice. For each Hit Die 
spent in this way, the player rolls the die and adds the 
characters Constitution modifier. The character regains 
hit points equal to the total. The player can decide to 
spend an additional Hit Die after each roll. 




























A character who uses a healing surge can't do so 
again until he or she finishes a short or long rest. 

Under this optional rule, a character regains all spent 
Hit Dice at the end of a long rest. With a short rest, 
a character regains Hit Dice equal to his or her level 
divided by four (minimum of one die). 

For a more superheroic feel, you can let a character 
use a healing surge as a bonus action, rather than as 
an action. 

Slow Natural Healing 
Characters don't regain hit points at the end of a long 
rest. Instead, a character can spend Hit Dice to heal at 
the end of a long rest, just as with a short rest. 

This optional rule prolongs the amount of time that 
characters need to recover from their wounds without 
the benefits of magical healing and workdventuring 
requires careful planning. 

This approach encourages the characters to 
spend time out of the dungeon. It's a good option for 
campaigns that emphasize intrigue, politics, and 
interactions among other NPCs. and in which combat is 
rare or something to be avoided rather than rushed into. 

Firearms 

If you want to model the swashbuckling style of 
The Three Musketeers and similar tales, you can 
introduce gunpowder weapons to your campaign that 
are associated w r ith the Renaissance. Similarly, in a 
campaign where a spaceship has rashed or elements 
of modern-day Earth are present futuristic or modern 


firearms might appear. The Firearms table provides 
examples of firearms from all three of those periods. 
The modern and futuristic items are priceless. 

Proficiency 

It's up to you to decide whether a character has 
proficiency with a firearm. Characters in most D&D 
worlds wouldn’t have such proficiency. During their 
downtime, characters can use the training rules in the 
Players Handbook to acquire proficiency, assuming 
that they have enough ammunition to keep the weapons 
working while mastering their use. 

Properties 

Firearms use special ammunition, and some of them 
have the burst fire or reload property. 

Ammunition. The ammunition of a firearm is 
destroyed upon use. Renaissance and modern firearms 
use bullets. Futuristic firearms are poweredccessful DC 12 Dexterity saving throw halves the 
damage. Setting fire to an ounce of gunpowder causes 
it to flare for 1 round, shedding bright light in a 30-foot 
radius and dim light for an additional 30 feet. 

Dynamite 

As an action, a creature can light a stick ol dynamite 
and throw it at a point up to 60 feet away. Each creature 
within 5 feet of that point must make a DC 12 Dexterity 
saving throw, taking 3d6 bludgeoning damage on a 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

CHAPTER 9 | DUNCEON MASTER’S WORKSHOP 











A character can bind sticks of dynamite together so 
they explode at the same time. Bach additional stick 
increases the damage by ld6 (to a maximum of 10d6) 
and the burst radius by 5 feet (to a maximum of 20 feet). 

Dynamite can be rigged with a longer fuse to explode 
after a set amount of time, usually 1 to 6 rounds. Roll 
initiative for the dynamite. After the set number of 
rounds goes by, the dynamite explodes on Lhat initiative. 


Grenades 

As an action, a character can throw a grenade at a 
point up to 60 feet away With a grenade launcher, the 
character can propel the grenade up to 120 feet away. 

Each creature within 20 feet of an exploding 
fragmentation grenade must make a DC 15 Dexterity 
saving throw, taking 5d6 piercing damage on a failed 
save, or hair as much damage on a successf ul one. 

One round after a similar item has advantage on Intelligence 
checks made to figure out its use* 


Explosives 


Renaissance Item 

Cost 

Weight 

Bomb 

150 gp 

1 lb. 

Gunpowder, keg 

250 gp 

20 lb. 

Gunpowder, powder horn 

35 gp 

2 lb. 

Modern Item 

Cost 

Weight 

Dynamite (stick) 

— 

1 lb. 

Grenade, fragmentation 

— 

1 lb. 

Grenade, smoke 

— 

21b. 

Grenade launcher 

— 

71b. 


Firearms 


Renaissance Item 

Cost 

Damage 

Weight 

Properties 


Martial Ranged Weapons 

Pistol 

250 gp 

IdlO piercing 

3 lb. 

Ammunition 

(range 30/90), loading 

Musket 

500 gp 

ld!2 piercing 

10 lb. 

Ammunition 

(range 40/120), loading, two-handed 

Ammunition 

Bullets (10) 

3 gp 

— 

21b. 

—— 


Modem Item 

Cost 

Damage 

Weight 

Properties 


Martial Ranged Weapons 

Pistol, automatic 

■—- 

2d6 piercing 

3 1b. 

Ammunition 

(range 50/150), reload (15 shots) 

Revolver 

-—- 

2d8 piercing 

3 !b. 

Ammunition 

(range 40/120), reload (6 shots) 

Rifle, hunting 

— 

2dl0 piercing 

8 1b. 

Ammunition 

[range S0/240), reload (5 shots), two-handed 

Rifle, automatic 

—<■ 

2d8 piercing 

81b. 

Ammunition 

(range 80/240), burst fire, reload (30 shots), two-handed 

Shotgun 

-—— 

2dS piercing 

71b. 

Ammunition 

(range 30/90), reload (2 shots), two-handed 

Ammunition 

Bullets (10) 

-— 

— 

1 lb. 

-—- 


Futuristic Item 

r 
her role and pick up where the previous DM left off. 

Using plot points in this way can make for an 
exciting campaign as each new DM steers the game in 
unexpected directions. This approach is also a great 
way for would-be DMs to try running a game in small 
controlled doses. 

In a campaign that uses plot points this way. everyone 
should come to the table with a hit of material prepared 
or specific encounters in mind. A player who isn’t 
prepared or who doesn't feel like DMingcan choose 
to not spend a plot point that session. 



















For this approach to work, it's a good Idea to establish 
some shared assumptions about the campaign so that 
DMs aren’t duplicating efforts or trampling on each 
other's plans. 

Combat Options 

The options in this section provide alternative ways to 
handle combat. The main risk of adding some of these 
rules is slowing down play. 

Initiative Variants _ 

This section offers different wavs to handle initiative. 
Initiative Score 

With this optional rule, creature don’t roll initiative 
at the start of combat. Instead, each creature has an 
initiative score, which is a passive Dexterity check: 

10 + Dexterity modifier. 

By cutting down on die rolls, math done on the fly, 
and the process of asking for and recording totals, you 
can speed your game up considerably—at the cost of an 
initiative order that is often  example, a badly wounded fighter might 
charge a troll because he knows that Lhe cleric goes 
before the monster and can heal him. 

Speed factor is an option for initiative that introduces 
more uncertainty into combat, at the cost of speed of 
play. Under this variant, the participants in a battle roll 
initiative each round. Before rolling, each character or 
monster must choose an action. 
































Initiative Modifiers. Modifiers might apply to a 
creature’s initiative depending on its size and the action 
ikes. For example, a creature that fights with a light 
weapon or casts a simple spell is more likely to act 
fore a creature armed with a heavy or slow weapon, 
re-c the Speed Factor Initiative Modifiers table for 
details. If an action has no modifier listed, the action has 
: effect on initiative. If more than one modifier applies 
such as wielding a two-handed, heavy melee weapon), 

, ply them all to the initiative roll. 


Speed Factor Initiative Modifiers 


'actor 

Spell casting 
.lelee, heavy weapon 
Melee, light or finesse weapon 
Melee, two-handed weapon 
angedp loading weapon 


Initiative Modifier 
Subtract the spell's level 
~2 
+2 
-2 
-5 


Creature Size 

Tiny 

Small 

’Medium 

_arge 

Huge 

largantu an 


Initiative Modifier 
+5 
+2 
+■0 
H2 
-5 
-8 


Don't apply the same modifier more than once on a 
feature’s turn. For example, a rogue fighting with two 
taggers gains the +2 bonus for using a light or finesse 
weapon only once, Jn the case of spellcasting. apply only 
the modifier from the highest-level spell. 

Apply any modifiers for bonus actions to that 
feature’s turn, remembering never to apply the 
same modifier twice. For instance, a paladin casts a 
ind-level spell as a bonus action and then attacks with a 
shortsword. The paladin takes a -2 penalty for the spell 
and gains a +2 bonus for using a light weapon, for a total 
modifier of +0. 

The table is only a starting point. You can refer to it 
hen adjudicating any actions a character takes that 
you think should he faster or slower. Quick, easy actions 
should grant a bonus, while slow, difficult ones should 
incur a penalty. As a rule of thumb, apply a bonus or 
penalty of 2 or 5 for an action. 

For example, a fighter wants to turn a winch to raise a 
portcullis. This is a complex, difficult action. You could 
rule that it incurs a -5 initiative penalty. 

Roiling Initiative * After deciding on an action, 
everyone rolls initiative and applies modifiers, keeping 
he result secret. You then announce an initiative 
number, starting with 30 and working down (it helps to 
■all out ranges of numbers at the start). Break any ties 
by having the combatant with the highest Dexterity act 
first. Otherwise, roll to determine who goes first. 

Turns. On its turn, a creature moves as normal but 
must take the action it selected or take no action at all. 

Once everyone has acted, the process repeats. 
Everyone in the battle selects an action, rolls initiative, 
and takes turns in order. 


Action Options _ 

This section provides new action options for combat. 
They can be added as a group or individually to 
your game. 

Climb onto a Bigger Creature 
If one creature wants to jump onto another creature, it 
can do so by grappling. A Small or Medium creature has 
little chance of making a successful grapple against a 
Huge or Gargantuan creature, however, unless magic 
has granted the grappler supernatural might. 

As an alternative, a suitably large opponent can be 
treated as terrain for the purpose of jumping onto its 
back or clinging to a limb. After making any ability 
checks necessary to get into position and onto the larger 
creature, the smaller creature uses its action to make 
a Strength (Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check 
contested by the target’s Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. 

If it wins the contest, the smaller creature successfully 
moves into the target creature’s space and clings to its 
body. While in the target's space, the smaller creature 
moves with the target and has advantage on attack rolls 
against it. 

The smaller creature can move around within the 
larger creaturmbler makes a Dexterity 
(Acrobatics) check contested by the hostile creature s 
Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. If the tumbler wins the 
contest, it can move through the hostile creature’s space 
once this turn. 

Hitting Cover _ _ 

When a ranged attack misses a target that has cover, 
you can use this optional rule to determine whether the 
cover was struck by the attack. 

First, determine whether the attack roll would have 
hit the protected target without the cover. If the attack 
roll falls within a range low enough to miss the target 
but high enough to strike the target if there had been 
no cover, the object used for cover is struck. If a creature 
is providing cover for the missed creature and the 
attack roll exceeds the AC of the covering creature, the 
covering creature is hit. 

Cleaving through Creatures _ 

If your player characters regularly fight hordes of lower- 
level monsters, consider using this optional rule to help 
speed up such lights. 

When a melee attack reduces an undamaged creature 
to 0 hit points, any excess damage from that attack 
might carry over to another creature nearby. The 
attacker targets another creature within reach and. if 
the original attack roll can hit it, applies any remaining 
damage to it. If that creature was undamaged and is 
likewise reduced to 0 hit points, repeat this process, 
carrying over the remaining damage until there are no 
valid targets, or until the damage carried over fails to 
reduce an undamaged creature to 0 hit points. 

Injuries _ 

Damage normally leaves no lingering effects. This 
option introduces the potential for long term injuries. 


It s up to you to decide when to cheek for a lingering 
injury. A creature might sustain a lingering injury under 
the following circumstances: 

* When it takes a critical hit 

* When it drops to 0 hit points but isn’t killed outright 

* When it fails a death saving throw by 5 or more 

To determine the nature of the injury, roll on the 
Lingering Injuries table. This table assumes a typical 
humanoid physiology, but you can adapt the results for 
creatures with different body types. 

Lingering Injuries 

d20 Injury 

1 Lose an Eye. You have disadvantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight and on 
ranged attack rolls. Magic such as the regenerate 
spell can restore the lost eye. If you have rro eyes 
left after sustaining this injury; you're blinded. 

2 Lose an Arm or a Hand. You can no longer hold 
anything with two hands, and you can hold only a 
single object at a time. Magic such as the regenerait 
spell can restore the lost appendage. 

3 Lose a Foot or Leg. Your speed on foot is halved, 
and you must use a cane or crutch to move unless 
you have a peg leg or other prosthesis. You fall 
prone after using the Dash a17-20 Minor Scar. The scar doesn't have any adverse 

effect. Magical healing of 6th level or higher, such 
as heal and regenerate, removes the scar. 


CHAPTER 5 


DUNGEON M \STL ITS WORKSHOP 











Instead of using the effect described in the table, you 
can put the responsibility of representing a character's 
lingering injury in the hands of the player Roll on the 
Lingering Injuries table as usual, but instead of suffering 
the effect described for that result, that character gains 
a new flaw with the same name. Its up to the player to 
express the lingering injury during play, just like any 
other flaw, with the potential to gain inspiration when 
the injury affects the character in a meaningful way. 

Massive Damage 

This optional rule makes it easier for a creature to be 
felled by massive damage. 

When a creature takes damage from a single source 
equal to or greater than half its hit point maximum, it 
must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw 
or suffer a random effect determined by a roll on the 
System Shock table. For example, a creature that has a 
hit point maximum of 30 must make that Constitution 
save if it takes 15 damage or more from a single source. 

System Shock 

dlO Effect 

1 The creature drops to 0 hit points. 

2- 3 The creature drops to 0 hit points but is stable. 

4-5 The creature is stunned until the end of its next turn. 
6-7 Tled save, the affected creature or group flees 
by the most expeditious route. If escape is impossible, 
the creature or group surrenders. If a creature or group 
that surrenders is attacked by its conquerors, the battle 
might resume, and it's unlikely that further attempts to 
flee or surrender will be made. 

A failed saving throw isn't always to the adventurers' 
benefit. For example, an ogre that flees from combat 
might put the rest of the dungeon on alert or run off with 
treasure that the characters had hoped to plunder. 

Creating a Monster 

The Monster Manual contains hundreds of ready-to-play 
monsters, but it doesn't include every monster that you 
can imagine. Fart of the D&D experience is the simple 
joy of creating new monsters and customizing existing 
ones, if for no other reason than to surprise and delight 
your players with something they've never faced before. 

The first step in the process is coming up with the 
concept for your monster. What makes it unique? Where 
does it live? What role do you want it to serve in your 
adventure, your campaign, or your world? What does 
it look like? Does it have any weird abilities? Once you 
have the answers to these questions, you can start 
figuring out how to represent your monster in the game. 

Modi fy i ng a M o ns t er _ 

Once you have an idea for a monster, you’ll need 
statistics to represent it. The firnster wields a manufactured weapon, you can 
replace that weapon with a different one. For example, 
you could replace a hobgoblin s longs word with a 
halberd. Don’t forget to change the damage and the 
attack's reach where appropriate. Also be aware of the 


CHAPTER 9 | DUNGEON’ MASTER'S WORKSHOP 





consequences of switching from a one-handed weapon 
lq a two-handed weapon, or vice versa* For example, a 
hobgoblin wielding a halberd (a two-handed weapon) 
loses the benefit of its shield, so its AC decreases by 2. 

Adding a Special Trait 

Another simple way to customize a monster is to add 
a special trait. You can add a special trait of vour own 
devising or pick up a special trait from one of the many 
creatures in the Monster Manual. For example, you can 
create a goblin-spider hybrid by giving the normal goblin 
the Spider Climb special trait, turn an ordinary troll into 
a two-headed troll by giving it the Two Heads special 
trait, or turn an owlbear into a flying owlbear by giving it 
wings and a giant owls flying speed. 

Creating Quick Monster Stats 

If all you need are simple stats for a monster of a 
particular challenge rat ing, follow the steps here. If you 


Monster Statistics by Challenge Rating 




Def 

ensive- 


Offensive - 



Prof. 

Armor 

Hit 

Attack 

Damage/ 

Save 

CR 

Bonus 

Class 

Points 

Bonus 

Round 

DC 

a 

+2 

< 13 

1-6 
61-805 

+13 

285-302 

22 

30 

+9 

19 

806-850 

+14 

303-320 

23 


want to create something more akin to the monster 
star blocks in the Monster Manual, skip ahead to the 
"Creating a Monster Stat Block 1 ' section. 

Step L Expected Challenge Rating 

Pick the expected challenge rating (CR) for your 
monster. Knowing the monster's expected challenge 
rating will help you figure out the monster's proficiency 
bonus and other important combat statistics. Don’t 
worry about getting the challenge rating exactly right: 
you can make adjustments in later steps. 

A single monster with a challenge rating equal to 
the adventurers' level is, by itself, a fair challenge for a 
group of four characters. If the monster is meant to be 
fought in pairs or groups, its expected challenge rating 
should be lower than the party’s level. 

Don't fall into the trap of thinking that your monster 
must have a challenge rating equal to the level of the 
characters to be a worthy challenge. Keep in mind that 
monsters with a lower challenge rating can be a threat 
to higher-level characters when encountered in groups. 

Step 2. Basic Statistics 

Use the Monster Statistics by Challenge Rating table to 
determine the monster's Armor Class, hit points, attack 
bonus, and damage output per round based on the 
challenge rating yon chose in step 1. 

Step 3. Adjust Statistics 

Raise or lows that 
much damage. 

Now look at the attack bonus suggested for a monster 
of that challenge rating. If your monster's attack bonus 
is at least two points higher or lower than that number. 


C H A FT F. S 9 1 D U N G E O N M A STIR’S W G RKS H O P 












adjust the challenge rati n a si: a a ^a: a by its damage 
output up or down by 1 for every 2 points of difference* 

If the monster relies more on affects with saving 
throws than on attacks* use the monster's save DC 
instead of its attack bonus* 

If your monster uses different attack bonuses or save 
DCs, use the ones that will come up the most often. 

Average Challonge Rating. T he monster's final 
challenge rating is the average of its defensive and 
offensive challenge ratings. Round the average up or 
down to the nearest challenge rating to determine 
your monster s final challenge rating. For example, if 
the creature’s defensive challenge rating is 2 and its 
offensive rating is 3, its final rating is 3. 

With the final challenge rating, you can determine the 
monsters proficiency bonus using the Monster Statistics 
by Challenge Rating table. Use the Experience Points 
by Challenge Rating table to determine how much XP 
the monster is worth* A monster of challenge rating 
0 is worth 0 XP if it poses no threat. Otherwise, it is 
worth 10 XP, 

Creating a monster isn’t just a number-crunching 
exerciseight be based on a real-world creature 
or a monster from myth, in which case its name might 
be obvious* If you need to invent a name, keep in 
mind that the best names either reflect the monsters 
appearance or nature (such as the mimic and the 
owlbear) or have a nice ring to them (such as the chuul 
and the thri-kreen). 

Step 2. Size 

Make your monster whatever size you want: Tiny. Small, 
Medium, Large, Huge, or Gargantuan* 

A monsters size determines which die is used to 
calculate its hit points in step 8* Size also determines 
how much space the monster occupies, as discussed in 
the Players Handbook. 

Step 3. Type 

A monster’s type provides insight into its origins and 
nature. The Monster Manual describes each monster 
type. Choose the type that best fits your concept for 
the monster. 

Step 4. Alignment 
If your monster has no concept of morals, it is 
unaligned. Otherwise, it has an alignment appropriate 
to its nature and moral outlook, as discussed in the 
Players Handbook. 

Step 5. Ability Scores and Modifiers 
Monsters, like player characters, have the six ability 
scores. A monster can’t have a score lower than 1 or 
higher than 30 in any ability. 

A monster s score in any ability determines its ability 
modifier, as shown in the Ability Scores and Modifiers 
table in the Player’s Handbook .. 

If you can’t decide what a monster's ability scores monster's challenge rating, as shown in later steps. 

Determine an Appropriate AC* Alternatively, you ca 
determine an appropriate AC based on the type of arm 
the monster wears, its natural armor, or some other 
Armor Class booster (such as the mage armor spell). 
Again, don’t worry if the monster's AC isn't matching up 
with the expected challenge rating for the monster 

If your monster wears manufactured armor, irs 
Armor Class is based on the type of armor worn (see 
the Player’s Handbook for armor types). If the monster 
carries a shield, apply the shield bonus to its AC 
as normal, 

A monster that doesn’t wear armor might have narj~ 
armor, in which case it has an AC equal to 10 + its 
Dexterity modifier + its natural armor bonus, A mons- ' 
whth a thick hide generally has a natural armor bonus 
of+1 to +3, The bonus can be higher if the creature 
is exceptionally well armored. A gorgon, for example 
is covered in steely plates and has n natural armor 
bonus of +9, 


Step 8, Hit Points 

A monster's hit points have a direct bearing on its 
challenge rating, and vice versa. You can determine > 
monster’s hit points in one of two w ays. 

Use the Table ■ You can start with the monster’s 
expected challenge rating and use the Monster 
Statistics by Challenge Rating table to determine an 
appropriate number of hit points. The table presents ~ 
range of hit pobility, 
resistance, or immunity to a :: ■nster only when it's 
intuitive. For example, it makes sr-nse for a monster 
made of molten lava to have immunisy to tire damage. 

Giving a monster resistances and immunities to three 
or more damage types (especially bludgeoning, piercing, 
and slashing damage) is like giving it extra hit points. 
However, adventurers have more resources at higher 
levels to counteract such defenses, making resistances 
and immunities less relevant at higher levels. 

Effective Hit Points. If a monster has resistance 
or Immunity to several damage types—especially 
bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage from 
non magical weapons—and not all the characters in the 
party possess the means to counteract that resistance 
or immunity, you need to take these defenses into 
account when comparing your monster s hit points to its 
expected challenge rating. Using the Effective Hit Points 
Based on Resistances and Immunities table, apply 
the appropriate multiplier to the monster's hit poinrs 
to determine its effective hit points for the purpose of 
gauging its final challenge rating. (The monsters actual 
hit points shouldn't change.) 

For example, a monster with an expected 
challenge rating of 6. 150 hit points, and resistance 
to bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage from 
non magical weapons effectively has 225 hit points 
(using the U5 mthe baseline attack bonus for a challenge 
rating 1 monster is +3, but if your monster needs more 
accuracy, raise its bonus accordingly. Don’t worry if 
the monsters attack bonus isn't matching up with the 
expected challenge rating for the monster Other factors 
can affect a monsters challenge rating, as shown in 
later steps. 

Calculate Attack Bonuses * Alternatively, you can 
calculate a monsters attack bonuses the same way 
players calculate the attack bonuses of a character. 

When a monster has an action that requires an attack 
roll, its attack bonus is equal to its proficiency bonus + 
its Strength or Dexterity modifier A monster usually 
applies its Strength modifier to melee attacks and its 
Dexterity modifier to ranged attacks, although smaller 
monsters sometimes use Dexterity for both. 

Again, don’t worry if the attack bonuses aren’t 
matching up with the expected challenge rating for 
the monster. You can always adjust a monster’s attack 
bonuses later. 

Step 1L Damage 

A monster's damage output—the amount of damage it 
deals every round- has a direct bearing on its challenge 
rating, and vice versa. You can determine a monster's 
damage output in one of two ways. 

Use the Table, You can start with the monster's 
expected challenge rating and use the Monster 
Statistics by Challenge Rating table to determine how 
much damage the monster should deal based on 
whatever weapon it is using. 


CHAPTER 9 I DUNGEON MASTER'S WORKSHOP 

277 



Don't worry if the damage output isn't matching up 
with the expected challenge rating for the monster. 
Other factors can affect a monster s challenge rating, 
as will be discussed in later steps, and you can always 
adjust a monster's damage output later on. 

Some monsters use natural weapons, such as claws 
or tail spikes. Others wield manufactured weapons. 

If a monster has natural weapons, you decide how 
much damage it deals with those attacks, as well as the 
type of damage. See the Monster Manual for examples. 
If a monster wields a manufactured weapon, it deals 
damage appropriate to the weapon. For example, a 
greataxe in the hands of a Medium monster deals Id 12 
slashing damage plus the monster's Strength modifier, 
as is normal for that weapon. 

Big monsters typically wield oversized weapons that 
deal extra dice of damage on a hit. Double the weapon 
dice if the creature is Large, triple the weapon dice if it's 
Huge, and quadruple the weapon dice if it’s Gargantuan. 
For example, a Huge giant wielding an appropriately 
sized greataxe deals 3d 12 slashing damage (plus its 
Strength bonus), instead of the normal ld!2. 

A creature has disadvantage on attack rolls with a 
weapon that is sized for a larger attacker. You can rule 
that a weapon sized for an attacker two or ters have attacks that do more than deal damage. 
Some effects that can be added to an attack to give it a 
flavorful twist include: 


* Adding damage of a different type to the attack 

* Having the monster grapple the target on a hit 

- Allowing the monster to knock the target prone on a hit 

* Imposing a condition on the target if the attack hits and 
the target fails a saving throw 



actions. For example, a baler's Fire Aura deals 10 
fire damage to any creature that hits the balor with a 
melee attack. The aura also deals 10 fire damage to all 
creatures within 5 feet of the balor at the start of each 
of the baler's turns. If you assume that one character :: 
the party is within 5 feet of the balor at all times, hitting 
it with a melee weapon every round, then the balor's 
damage output per round increases by 20. 

Step 12, Save DCs 

A monster might have an attack or some other trait 
that requires a target to make a saving throw. The save 
DCs to resist such effects have a direct bearing on the 
monster's challenge rating, and vice versa. You can 
determine save DCs in one of two ways. 

Use the Table, You can start with the monster's 
expected challenge rating and use the Monster 
Statistics by Challenge Rating table to determine an 
appropriate save DC for any effect that requires a larg t 
to make a saving throw. 

Calculate the DCs . Alternatively, you can calth a clash (—). 

When assigning special traits, actions, or reactions 
to a monster, keep in mind that not all monsters need 
them. The more you add. the more complex (and harder 
to run) the monster becomes. 

Innate Spellcasting and Spellcasting. The impact 
that the Innate Spellcasting and Spellcasting special 
traits have on a monster's challenge rating depends 
on the spells that the monster can cast. Spells that 
deal more damage than the monster's normal attack 
routine and spells that increase the monster’s AC or 
hit points need to be accounted for when determining 
the monster’s final challenge rating. See the ''Special 
Traits"' section in the introduction of the Monster 
Manual for more information on these two special traits. 

Step 14, Speed 

Every monster has a walking speed. (Immobile 
monsters have a walking speed of 0 feet.) In addition to 
its walking speed, a monster might have one or more 
other speeds, including a burrowing, climbing, flying, or 
swimming speed. 

Flying Monster. Increase the monster’s effective 
Armor Class by 2 (not its actual AC) if it can fly and deal 
damage at range and if its expected challenge rating 
is TO or lower (higher-level characters have a greater 
ability to deal with flying creatures). 

Step 15, Saving Throw Bonuses 

If you want a monster to be unusually resistant to 
certain kinds of effects, you can give it eption) checks, while a duplicitous monster might 
have a bonus on Charisma (Deception) checks. 

You can double the proficiency bonus to account for 
heightened mastery. For example, a doppelganger is 
so good at deceiving others that its bonus on Charisma 
(Deception) checks is equal to double its proficiency 
bonus + its Charisma modifier. 

Skill bonuses have no bearing on a monster’s 
challenge rating. 

Step 18, Condition Immunities 

A monster can be immune to one or more debilitating 
conditions, and these immunities have no bearing on 
its challenge rating. For descriptions of the various 
conditions, see appendix A of the Flayers Handbook. 

As with damage immunities, condition immunities 
should be intuitive and logical. For example, it makes 
sense that a stone golem can’t be poisoned, since its a 
construct without a nervous system or internal organs. 

Step 19. Senses 

A monster might have one or more of the following 
special senses, which are described in the Monster 
Manual: blindsight dark vision, trernorsense, and 
truesight. Whether the monster has special senses or 
not has no bearing on its challenge rating. 

Passive Perception Score * All monsters have a 
passive Wisdom (Perception) score, which is most 
often used to determine whether a monster detects 
approaching or hidden enemies, A monster’s passive 
Wisdom (Perception) score is 10 + its Wisdunt noted in 
the trait 

Antimagic Susceptibility 

Flying sword 

-—- 

Avoidance 

Demilfch 

Increase the monster's effective AC by T 

Blind Senses 

Grimlock 

— 

Blood Frenzy 

Sahuagin 

Increase the monster's effective attack bonus by 4. 

Breath Weapon 

Ancient black dragon 

For the purpose of determining effective damage output, assume the breath 
weapon hits two targets, and that each target fails its saving throw. 

Brute 

Bugbear 

Increase the monster's effective per-round damage by the amount noted in 
the trait- 

Chameleon Skin 

Troglodyte 

— 

Change Shape 

Ancient brass dragon 

— 

Charge 

Centaur 

Increase the monster's damage on one attack by the amount noted in the trait. 

Charm 

Vampire 

— 

Constrict 

Constrictor srrake 

Increase the monster's effective AC by T 

Damage Absorption 

Flesh golem 

— 

Damage Transfer 

Darkmantle 

Double the monster’s effective hit points. Add one-third of the monster's hit 
points to its per-round damage. 

Death Burst 

Magmin 

Increase the monster’s effective damage output for 1 round by the amount 
noted in the trait, and assume it affects two creatures. 

Devil Sight 

Barbed devil 

— 

Dive 

Aarakocra 

Increase the monster's effective damage on one attack by the amount noted in 
the trait. 

Echolocation 

Hook horror 

■—- 

Elemental Body 

Azer 

Increase the monster’sonster 

Shadow demon 

Effect on Challenge Rating 

Magic Resistance 

Magic Weapons 

Balor 

Balor 

Increase the monster's effective AC by 2. 

Martial Advantage 

Hobgoblin 

Increase the effective damage of one attack per round by the amount gained 
from this trait. 

Mimicry 

Nimble Escape 

Kenku 

Gobtin 

Increase the monster's effective AC and effective attack bonus by 4 (assuming 
the monster hides every round). 

Otherworldly Perception 

Kuo-toa 

— 

Pack Tactics 

Kobold 

Increase the monster’s effective attack bonus by 1. 

Parry 

Hobgoblin warlord 

Increase the monster's effective AC by 1. 

Possession 

Ghost 

Double the monster's effective hit points. 

Pounce 

Tiger 

Increase the monster's effective damage for 1 round by the amount it deals 
with the bonus action gained from this trait. 

Psychic Defense 

Githzerai monk 

Apply the monster's Wisdom modifier to its actual AC If the monster isn't 
wearing armor or wielding a shield. 

Rampage 

Gnoll 

Increase the monster's effective per-round damage by 2. 

Reactive 

Marilith 

— 

Read Thoughts 

Doppelganger 

— 

Reckless 

Minotaur 

■—■ 

Redirect Attack 

Goblin boss 

— 

Reel 

Roper 

—■ 

Regeneration 

Troll 

1 ncrease the monster's effective hit points by 3 x the number of hit points the 
monster regenerates each round. 

Rejuvenation 

Uch 

— 

Relentless 

We rr 

— 

Web Walker 

Giant spacer 

— 

Wounded Fury 

Quaggotb 

increase the monster’s damage for 1 round by the amount noted in the trait. 


GIIAFTER 9 I D U N G It ON M A STE R' 5 WORKS I! O P 



If you want to take ail NFC stat block and adapt it for 
a specific monster race, apply the ability modifiers and 
add the features listed in the NPC Features table. If the 
N PCs AC, hit points, attack bonus, or damage changes, 
recalculate its challenge rating. 

Creating NPGs from Scratch 

If you need completely new statistics for an NPC. you 

have two options; 


* You can create an NPC stat block (similar to the ones 
in the Monster Manual) as you would a monster stat 
block, as discussed in the previous section. 

* You can build the NPC as you would a player 
character, as discussed in the Players Handbook ♦ 

If you decide to build an NPC the same way you build 
a player character, you can skip choosing a background 
and instead pick two skill proficiencies for the NPC. 



NPC Features 

Race Ability Modifiers 

Features 

Aarakocra 

+2 Dex, +2 Wis 

Dive Attack; talon attack action; speed 20 ft., fly 50 ft,; speaks Auran 

Bullywug 

-2 Int, -2 Cha 

Amphibious, Speak with Frogs and Toads, Swamp Camouflage, Standing Leap; speed 

20 ft. 3 swim 40 ft.; speaks Bullywug 

Dragonborn* 

+2 Str, +1 Cha 

Breath Weapon (use challenge rating instead of level to detemmon and Ore 

Halfiing* 

+2 Dex, +1 Con or Cha 

Brave, Halfiing Nimbleness, Lucky; Small size; speed 25 ft,; speaks Common and Halfiing 

Hobgoblin 

None 

Martial Advantage; darkvision 60 ft,; speaks Common and Goblin 

Kenku 

+2 Dex 

Ambusher, Mimicry; understands Auran and Common but speaks only through the use 
of its Mimicry trait 

Kobold 

-4 Str, +2 Dex 

Pack Tactics, Sunlight Sensitivity; Small size; darkvision 60 ft.; speaks Common and 
Draconic 

Kuo-toa 

None 

Amphibious, Otherworldly Perception, Slippery, Sunlight Sensitivity; speed 30 ft., swim 

30 ft.; darkvision 120 ft.; speaks Undercommon 

Liza rd folk 

+2 Str, -2 Int 

Hold Breath (15 min.); +3 natural armor bonus to AC; speed 30 ft, swim 30 ft.; speaks 
Draconic 

Merfolk 

None 

Amphibious; speed 10 ft., swim 40 ft.; speaks Aquan and Common 

Ore 

+2 Str, -2 Int 

Aggressive; darkvision 60 ft,; speaks Common and Ore 

Skeleton 

+2 Dex, -4 Int, -4 Cha 

Vulnerable to bludgeoning damage; immune to poison damage and exhaustion; can't be 
poisoned; darkvision 60 ft,; can’t speak but understands the languages it knew in life 

Tiefling* 

+1 Int, +2 Cha 

Infernal Legacy (use challenge rating instead of level to determine spells), resistance to 
fire damage; darkvision 60 ft.; speaks Common and Infernal 

Troglodyte 

+2 Str, +2 Con, -4 Int, 

-4 Cha 

Chameleon Skin, Stench, Sunlight Sensitivitylass (such a monster would 
be expressed as "Werewolf, 4th-level barbarian’). 

Start with the monster's stat block. The monster gains 
all the class features for every class level you add. with 
the following exceptions: 

* The monster doesn't gain the starting equipment of 
the added class, 

* For each class level you add T the monster gains one 
Hit Die of its normal type (based on its size), ignoring 
the class's Hit Die progression. 

* The monster’s proficiency bonus is based on its 
challenge rating, not its class levels. 

Once you finish adding class levels to a monster, 
feel free to tweak its ability scores as you see fit (for 
example, raising the monster s Intelligence score so 
that the monster is a more effective wizard), and make 
whatever other adjustments are needed. You’ll need 
to recalculate its challenge rating as though you had 
designed the monster from scratch. 

Depending on the monster and the number of class 
levels you add to it, its challenge rating might change 
very little or increase dramatically. For example, a 
werewolf that gains four barbarian levels is a much 
greater threat than it was before* In contrast, the hit 
points, spells, and other class features that an ancient 
red dragon gains from five levels of wizard don’t 
increase its challenge rating. 



healing spells* for example, and adding a healing spell 
to the wizard claand making an average result 
more likely. 


(; H A FT ER | D V N G EON MASTER* S W GRKSH 0,1 * 


2 83 


























Spell Damage 


Spell Level 

One Target 

Multiple Targets 

Cantrip 

ld10 

ld6 

1st 

2dT0 

2d6 

2nd 

3d10 

4d6 

3rd 

SdlO 

6d6 

4th 

6dl0 

7d6 

Sth 

SdlO 

8d6 

6th 

lOdIO 

Hd6 

7th 

ndio 

12d 6 

8th 

12d 10 

13d6 

9th 

1 SdlO 

14d 6 


Healing Spells 

You can also use the Spell Damage table to determine 
how many hit points a healing spell restores. A cantrip 
shouldn’t offer healing. 

Creating a Magic Item 

The magic items in chapter 7. “Treasure" are but a few 
of the magic treasures that characters can discover 
during their adventures. If your p1a}'ers are seasoned 
veterans and you want to surprise them, you can either 
modify an existing item or come up with something new 

Modifyin g an I tem _ 

The easiest way to invent a new item is to tweak an 
existing one. If a paladin uses a flail as her main 
weapon, you could change a holy avenger so that it's a 
flail instead of a sword. You can turn a ring of the ram 
into a wand, or a cloak of protection into a circlet of 
protection , all without altering the item's properties. 

Other substitutions are equally easy. An item that 
deals damage of one type can easily deal damage of 
another type, A flame tongue sword could deal lightning 
damage instead of fir day is 
easier to manage. 

Power Level 

If you make an item that lets a character kill whatever 
he or she hits with it. that item will likely unbalance your 
game. On the other hand, an item whose benefit rarely 
comes into play isn't much of a reward and probably not 
worth doling out as one. 

Use the Magic Item Power by Rarity table as a guide 
to help you determine how powerful an item should be. 
based on its rarity. 

Magic Item Power by Rarity 


Rarity 

Max Spell Level 

Max Bonus 

Common 

1st 

— 

Uncommon 

3rd 

+1 

Rare 

6th 

+2 

Very rare 

Sth 

+3 

Legendary 

9th 

+4 


Maximum Spell Level. This column of the table 
indicates the highest-level spell effect the item should 
confer in the form of a once-per-day or similarly limited 
property. For example, a common item might confer 
the benefit of a 1 sblevel spell once per day (or just once, 
if it's consumable), A rare, very rare, or legendary item 
might allow its possessor to cast a lower-level spell 
more frequently. 

Maximum Bonus , If an item delivers a static bonus 
to AC. at Lack rolls, saving throws, or ability checks, this 
column suggests an appropriate bonus based on the 
item's rarity. 

Attunement 

Decide w hether the item requires a character to be 
attuned to it to use its properties. Use these rules of 
thumb to help you decide: 

- ff having all the characters in a party pass e the race's signature traits? 

* In the case of a new subrace, what sets it apart from 
the other subraces of the parent race? 

Compare the race you have in mind with the other 
race options available to players, to make sure that the 
new race doesn't pale in comparison to the existing 
options (which would result in the race being unpopular) 
or completely overshadow^ them (so that players don’t 
feel as if the other options are inferior). 

When the time comes to design the game elements 
of the race, such as its traits, take a look at the game’s 
existing races and let them inspire you. 

Cosmetic Alterations 

A simple way to modify an existing race is to change 
its appearance. Changes to a race's appearance need 
not affect its game elements. For example, you could 
transform ha 1 flings into anthropomorphic mice without 
changing their racial traits at all. 

Cultural Alterations 

In your world, elves might be desert nomads instead of 
forest dwellers, halflings might live in cloud cities, and 
dwarves might be sailors instead of miners. When you 
change the culture of a race, you can also make minor 
alterations to the races proficiencies and traits to reflect 
that culture. 

For example, imagine that the dwarves of your world 
are seafarers and inventors of gunpowder. You could 
add the pistol and musket to the list of weapons that 
dwarves are proficient witn training shared by 
high elves and wood elves. 

An ability that sets the eladrin apart from other elves 
is their ability to step through the boundary between the 
planes* disappearing for a moment before reappearing 
somewhere else* In the game, this is reflected in a 


limited use of the misty step spell* Since misty step is 
a 2nd-level spell, this ability is potent enough that the 
subraee doesn't need additional traits* This leaves us 
with the following features for the eladrin subrace; 

Ability Score Increase, Your Intelligence score 
increases by i . 

Elf Weapon Training. You have proficiency with the 
longsword* shortsword, shortbow, and longbow. 

Fey Step, You can cast the misty step spell once usir^ 
this trait. You regain the ability to do so when you finish 
a short or long rest. 

Creating a New Race 
When creating a race from scratch* begin with the 
story and proceed from there* Compare your creation 
to the other races of your world, and borrow freely 
from the traits of other races. As an example, consider 
the aasimar. a race similar to the tiefling but with a 
celestial heritage. 

Example Race; Aasimar 

Whereas tiefiings have fiendish blood in their veins* 
aasimar are the descendants of celestial beings* These 
folk generally appear as glorious humans with lustrous 
hair, flawless skin, and piercing eyes. Aasimar often 
attempt to pass as humans ing's spells with spells of similar leveL 
that more closely match the aasimar's celestial ancestn 
However, the aasimar’s expanded resistance might 
require limiting this trait to basic utility spells. 

Filling in the remaining details, we end up with the 
following racial traits for the aasimar: 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score increases 
by 1, and your Charisma score increases by 2. 


h after ?> 


L ) t .i N (; E O N M A ST IS ft'S W ORKS H G P 







Age. Aasimar mature at the same rate as humans but 
live a few years longer. 

Alignment . Due to their celestial heritage, aasimar 
are often good. However, some aasimar fall into evil, 
rejecting their heritage. 

Size. Aasimar are built like well-proportioned 
humans. Your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. Thanks to your celestial heritage, you 
have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You 
can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were 
bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light. You 
can’t discern color in darkness, only shades of gray. 

Celestial Resistance. You have resistance to necrotic 
damage and radiant damage. 

Celestial Legacy. You know the light cantrip. Once 
you reach 3rd level, you can cast the lesser restoration 
spell once with this trait, and you regain the ability to do 
so when you finish a long rest. Once you reach 5r that forbids the accumulation of 
material goods, other than magic items useful for their 
divine mission. Such clerics carry a staff, but they 
are forbidden from wearing armor or using weapons 
other than that staff. To reflect this, you could remove 
the armor and weapon proficiencies for clerics of this 
faith, making them proficient with the quarterstaff and 
nothing else. You could give them a benefit to make up 
for the loss of proficiencies—something like the monk’s 
Unarmored Defense class feature, but presented as a 
divine blessing. 


Changing Spell Lists 

Modifying a class’s spell list usually has little effect on 
a character’s power but can change the flavor of a class 
significantly. In your world, paladins might not swear 
their oaths to ideals, but instead swear fealty to powerful 
sorcerers. To capture this story concept, you could build 
a new paladin spell list with spells meant to protect 
their masters, drawn from the sorcerer or wizard lists. 
Suddenly, the paladin feels like a different class. 

Be cautious when changing the warlock spell list. 
Since warlocks regain their spell slots after a short rest, 
they have the potential to use certain spells more times 
in a day than other classes do. 

Restricting Class Access 

Without changing the way a class functions, you can 
root it more firmly in the world by associating the class 
with a parr campaign, you can pull 
them out of the class and replace them with new 
ones. In doing so, you should strive to make sure 
that the new options are just as appealing as the 
ones you are removing, and that the substitute class 
features contribute to the class’s effectiveness at social 
interaction, exploration, or combat just as well as those 
being replaced. 

Ultimately, a class exists to help a player express a 
particular character concept, and any class feature you 
replace is also removing an aspect of that character. 
Substituting a class feature should be done only to fit a 
specific need for your campaign, or to appeal to a player 
trying to create a specific kind of character (perhaps one 
modeled after a character from a novel, TV series, comic 
book, or movie). 


CHAPTER 9 


DUNGEON MASTER'S WORKSHOP 


287 





The first step is to figure out what class feature or 
group of class features you're going to replace. Then 
you need to evaluate what each feature provides to the 
class, so that the features you are adding don't make the 
class over- or underpowered. Ask yourself the following 
questions about a feature youVe replacing: 

* What impact does replacing the feature have on 
exploration, social interaction, or combat? 

* Does replacing the feature affect how long the party 
can continue adventuring in a day? 

- Does the feature consume resources pr arcane tradition, and 
so forth. Creating a new option doesn't require you to 
remove anything from the class, but any new option 
you add should be compared to existing options to 
make sure it's no more or less powerful, yet remains 
distinctive in flavor. Like anything in class design, be 
prepared to play test your ideas and make changes if 
things aren’t playing out the way you want them to. 


Once you have the concept for the class option in 
mind, it’s time to design the specifics. If you're not sur- 
wherc to begin, look at the existing options and see w'nM 
class features they provide. It’s perfectly acceptable fbr 
two class options to have similar features, and it's als: 
fine to look at other classes for examples of mechanics 
you can draw on for inspiration. As you design each 
class feature, ask the following questions: 

* How does the class feature reinforce the story or 
theme of the class option? 

- Is there an existing feature that can be used 
as a model? 

« How does the new class feature compare to other 
features of the same level? 

Variant: Spell Points 

One way to modify how a class feels is to change how :t 
uses its spells. With this variant system, a character v 
has the Spellcasting feature uses spell points instead of 
spell slots to fuel spells. Spell points give a caster more 
flexibility, at the cost of greater complexity. 

In th isaracter’s level in that 
class by three. 

This system can be applied to monsters that cast 
spells using spell slots, but it isn't recommended that 
you do so. Tracking spell point expenditures fora 
monster can be a hassle. 


Spell Point Cost 


Spell Level 

Point Cost 

Spell Level 

Point ( 

1st 

2 

5th 

7 

2nd 

3 

6th 

9 

3rd 

5 

7th 

10 

4th 

6 

3th 

11 



9th 

13 


C H A PT E R 9 | D V N G E O N M A Si E k‘S WORKSHOP 












Spell Points by Level 


Class Level 

Spell Points 

Max Spell Level 

1st 

4 

1st 

2nd 

6 

1st 

3rd 

14 

2nd 

4th 

17 

2nd 

5th 

27 

3rd 

6th 

32 

3rd 

7th 

38 

4th 

8th 

44 

4th 

9 th 

57 

5 th 

10th 

64 

5th 

11th 

73 

6th 

12th 

73 

6th 

13th 

83 

7th 

14th 

83 

7th 

15th 

94 

8th 

16th 

94 

8th 

17th 

107 

9th 

18th 

114 

9th 

19th 

123 

9 th 

20th 

133 

9th 


Creating a Background 

A well-crafted background can help a player create a 
character that feels like an exciting addition to your 
campaign* It helps define the character's place in the 
world, rather than what a character is in terms of game 
mechanics. 

Instead of focusing on a generic character 
background, such as merchant or wanderer, think 
about the factions* organizations, and cultures of 
your campaign and how they might be leveraged to 
create flavorful backgrounds for player characters don't use 
the tables* this step helps you paint a picture of the 
background's place in your world* The tables need not 
be extensive; two or three entries per table are enough. 

Step 3* Assign Proficiencies or Languages 
Choose two skill proficiencies and two tool proficiencies 
for the background* You can replace tool proficiencies 
with languages on a one-for-one basis. 

Step 4* Include Starting Equipment 
Make sure your background offers a package of starting 
equipment. In addition to a small amount of money that 
a character can use to buy adventuring gear, the starting 
equipment should include items that a character would 
have acquired prior to becoming an adventurer, as well 
as one or two items unique to the background. 

For example, starting equipment for a character with 
the acolyte of Candlekeep background might include a 
set of traveler s clothes* a scholar's robe, five candles, 
a tinderbox. an empty scroll case engraved with the 
symbol of Candlekeep, and a belt pouch containing 10 
gp. The scroll case might be a gift given to an acolyte of 
Candlekeep who embarks on a life of adventure. At your 
discretion, it might also contain a useful map. 

Step 5. Settle on a Background Feature 
Choose an existing background feature or create a new 
one, as you prefer. If you choose an existing feature, add 
or tweak a few details to make it unique. 

For example, chambers, stairs, and so 
on—each of them generated by rolls on different tables. 

Following these instructions can lead to sprawling 
complexes that more than till a single sheet of graph 
paper. If you want to constrain the dungeon, establish 
limits ahead of time on how far it can grow. 

The most obvious limit to a dungeon s size is the 
graph paper it’s drawn on. If a feature would exceed 
the boundaries of the page, curtail it. A corridor might 
turn or come to a dead end at the map's edge, or you can 
make a chamber smaller to fit the available space. 

Alternatively, you can decide that passages leading off 
the edge of the map arc additional dungeon entrances. 
Stairs, shafts, and other features that would normally 
lead to levels you don’t plan to map can serve a 
similar purpose. 

Starting Area 

The Starting Area table produces a chamber or a set of 
corridors at the entrance to your dungeon. When rolling 
for a random starting area, pick one of the doors or 
passages leading into the starting area as the entrance 
to the dungeon as a whole. 

Once you've selected the entrance, roll on the 
appropriate table for each passage or door leading away 
from the starting area. Passages each extend 10 feet 
beyond the starling area. After that point, check on the 
Passage table for each passage to determine what lies 
beyond. Use the Beyond a Door table to determinege: 

3 Continue straight 20 ft, door to the right, then an 

additional 10 ft. ahead 

4 Continue straight 20 ft, door to the left, then an 
additional 10 ft. ahead 

5 Continue straight 20 ft.; passage ends in a door 

6-7 Continue straight 20 ft,, side passage to the righ; 

then an additional 10 ft. ahead 

8-9 Continue straight 20 ft,, side passage to the left, 
then an additional 10 ft. ahead 

10 Continue straight 20 ft,, comes to a dead end; 10 
percent chance of a secret door 

11-12 Continue straight 20 ft., then the passage turns 
left and continues 10 ft. 

13-14 Continue straight 20 ft. f then the passage turns 
right and continues 10 ft. 

15-19 Chamber (roll on the Chamber table) 

20 Stairs* (roll on the Stairs table) 

* The existence of stairs presumes a dungeon with more tha-' 
one level. If you don’t want a multilevel dungeon, reroll this 
result use the stairs as an alternative entrance, or replace the ~ 
with another feature of your choice. 


Passage Width 

dl2/d20 Width 

1-2 5 ft. 

3-12 10 ft 

13-14 20 ft. 

15-16 30 ft, 

17 40 ft,,, with row of pillars down the middle 

18 40 ft,, with double row of pillars 

19 40 ft. wide, 20 ft. high 

20 40 ft. wide, 20 ft. high, gallery 10 ft. above floor 

allows access to- level above 






A V P E N DIX A | RANDOM D U N G E O N S 




Doors 

Whenever a table roll indk r- - 1 n roll on the Door 

Type taft 1 

10-12 

Rectangle, 30 x 40 ft. ! 

13-14 

Rectangle, 40 x 50 ft 

15 

Rectangle, 50 x 80 ft. 2 

16 

Circle, 30 ft. diameter 

17 

Circle, 50 ft. diameter 2 

18 

Octagon, 40 x 40 ft. 

19 

Octagon, 60 x 60 ft. 2 

20 

Trapezoid, roughly 40 x 60 ft, 2 

' Use the N 

ormal Chamber column on the Chamber Exits table. 

z Use the Large Chamber column on the Chamber Exits table. 


Large Chamber 
0 

1 
2 
2 
3 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Exit Location 

d20 Location 
1-7 Wat I o p pos i te entra nee 

8-12 Wall left of entrance 
13-17 Wall right of entrance 

18-20 Same wall as entrance 


Chamber Exits 

d2G Normal Chamber 

1-3 0 

4-5 0 

6-8 1 

9-11 1 

12-13 2 

14-15 2 

16-17 3 

18 3 

19 4 

20 4 


Exit Type 

d20 Type 

I- 10 Door (roll on the Door Type table) 

II- 20 Corridor, 10 ft. long 


Stairs 

Stairs can include any means of going up and down, 
including ramps, chimneys, open shafts, elevators, and 
ladders. If your dungeon has more than one level, the 
amount of space between levels is up to you, A distance 
of 30 feet works line for most dungeons. 


Stairs 


d20 Stairs 

1-4 Down one level to a chamber 

5-8 Down one level to a passage 20 ft. long 

9 Down two levels to a chamber 

10 Down two levels to a passage 20 ft, long 

11 Down three levels to a chamber 


12 Down three levels to a passage 20 ft. long 

13 Up one level to a chamber 

14 Up one le 
than a list of monsters, a list of treasures, and a list of 
one or two key elements for each dungeon area. 

Chamber Purpose ___ 

A room's purpose can help determine its furnishings 
and other contents. 

For each chamber on your dungeon map. establish its 
purpose or use the tables below to generate ideas. Each 
type of dungeon described in the “Dungeon Purpose” 


\ PPliNDJX A RA H DOM DIJNGEONS 


section of chapter 5* “Adventure Environments,” has its 
own table featuring chambers geared to the dungeon’s 
purpose. For example, if you're building a tomb, use the 
Dungeon: Tomb table to help you determine the purpose 
of each chamber. These dungeon-specific tables are 
followed by the General Dungeon Chambers table, 
which you can use if your dungeon isn't an exact fit for 
one of the standard types of dungeon or if you want to 
mix things up. 

Relying on random rolls to stock an entire dungeon 
can lead to incongruous results. A tiny room might end 
up being identified as a temple, while the huge chamber 
next door serves as storage. It can be fun to try to make 
sense of such strange design ideas, but make changes 
as you see fit. You can set aside a few' key rooms and 
create specific contents for them. 

Dungeon: Death Trap 

d20 

1 

2-8 
9-11 


12-14 

15-19 

20 


Purpose 

Antechamber or waiting room for spectators 
Guardroom fortified against intruy secret door, used 
to hold captives condemned to the maze 

12 Shrine dedicated to a god or other entity 
13-14 Storage for food, as well as tools used by the maze’s 
guardians to keep the complex in working order 
15-18 Trap to confound or kill those sent into the maze 

19 Well that provides drinking water 

20 Workshop where doors, torch sconces, and other 
furnishings are repaired and maintained 

Dungeon: Mine 

d20 Purpose 

1-2 Barracks for miners 

3 Bedroom for a supervisor or manager 

4 Chapel dedicated to a patron deity of miners, 
earth, or protection 

5 Cistern providing drinking water for miners 

6-7 Guardroom 

8 Kitchen used to feed workers 

9 Laboratory used to conduct tests on strange 
minerals extracted from the mine 

10-15 Lode where metal ore is mined (75 percent chance 
of being depleted) 

16 Office used by the mine supervisor 

17 Smithy for repairing damaged tools 
18-19 Storage for tools and other equipment 

20 Strong room or vault used to store ore for 
transport to the surface 


d100 Purpose 

01-03 Decorated foyer or antechamber 
04-08 Armory used by the portal’s guardians 
09-10 Audience chamber for receiving visitors 
11-19 Barracks used by the portal’s guards 
20-23 Bedroom for use by the high-ranking members of 
the order that guards the portal 
24-30 Chapel dedicated to a deity or deities related to 
the portal and its defenders 











Dungeon: Stronghold 

dIOG Purpose 

Antechamber where visitors seeking access to the 
stronghold wait 

Armory holding high-quality gear, including light 
siege weapons such as baliistas 
Audience chamber used by the master of the 
stronghold to receive visitors 
Aviary or zoo for keeping exotic creatures 
Banquet room for hosting celebrations and guests 
Barracks used by elite guards 
Bath outfitted with a marble floor and other 
luxurious accoutrements 
Bedroom for use by the stronghold's master or 
important guests 

Chapel dedicated to a deity associated with the 
stronghold's master 
Cistern providing drinking water 
Dining room for intimate gatherings or informal 
meals 

Dressing room featuring a number of wardrobes 
Gallery for the display of expensive works of art 
and trophies 

Game room used to entertain visitors 
Guardroom 

Kennel where monsters or trained animals that 
protect the stronghold are kept 
Kitchen designed to prepare exotic foods for large 
numbers of guests 

Library with an extensive collection of rare books 
Lounge used to entertain guests 
Pantry, including cellar for wine or spirits 
Sitting room for family and intimate guests 
Stable 

Storage for mundane goods and supplies 
Strong room or vault for protecting important 
treasures (75 percent chance of being hidden 
behind a secret door) 

Study, including a writing desk 
Throne roocks 

62 

Office 

11 

Bath or latrine 

63-64 

Pantry 

12 

Bedroom 

65-66 

Pen or prison 

13 

Bestiary 

67-68 

Reception room 

14-16 

Cell 

69-70 

Refectory 

17 

Chantry 

m 

Robing room 

IS 

Chapel 

72 

Salon 

19-20 

Cistern 

73-74 

Shrine 

21 

Classroom 

75-76 

Sitting room 

22 

Closet 

77^78 

Smithy 

2 3 ”24 

Conjuring room 

79 

Stable 

25-26 

Court 

80-81 

Storage room 

27-29 

Crypt 

S2-S3 

Strong room 

30-31 

Dining room 


or vault 

32-33 

Divination room 

84-85 

Study 

34 

Dormitory 

S6-88 

Temple 

35 

Dressing room 

89-90 

Throne room 

36 

Entry room or 

91 

Torture chamber 


vestibule 

92-93 

Training or 

37-38 

Gallery 


exercise room 

39-40 

Game room 

94-95 

Trophy room 

41-43 

Guardroom 


or museum 

44-45 

Hall 

96 

Waiting room 

46-47 

Hall, great 

97 

Nursery or 

43-49 

Hallway 


schoolroom 

50 

Kennel 

98 

Well 

51-52 

Kitchen 

99-00 

Workshop 


Current Chamber State 


If a dungeon has a tumultuous history, you can roll to 
determine the current condition of any particular area. 
Otherwise, if the room is still used for its intended 
purpose, it remains intact. 

Current Chamber State 



treasure vault 

d20 

Features 

11 

Kitchen for feec ng gua r ds 

1-3 

Rubble, ceiling partially collapsed 

12 

Watch room that a cw$ guaros to observe those 

4-5 

Holes goals to define 
its presence in the dungeon. 

For large groups of monsters encountered across 
multiple chambers, motivation could apply to the entire 
group, or each subgroup could have conflicting goals. 


Monster Motivation 


d2G 

Goals 

d20 

Goals 

1-2 

Find a sanctuary 

12-13 

Hide from 

3-5 

Conquer the 


enemies 


dungeon 

14-15 

Recover from a 

6-8 

Seek an item in 


battle 


the dungeon 

16-17 

Avoid danger 

9-11 

Slay a rival 

18-20 

Seek wealth 


Random Dungeon Hazards 

Hazards are rarely found in inhabited areas, because 
monsters either clear them away or avoid them. 

Shnekersand violet fungi are described in the 
Monster Manual. The other hazards on the table are 
described in chapter 5, ' Adventure Environments," 


Once you have a sense of the purpose of the various 
dungeon chambers, you can think about the contents 
of those areas. The Dungeon Chamber Contents table 
allows you to randomly roll contents for a chamber, or 
you can choose contents for specific areas. If you choose 
contents, be sure to include an interesting, colorful 
assortment of things. In addition to the contents shown 
on this table, refer to “Dungeon Dressing' later in this 
appendix for additional items and elements to fill rooms. 

In the Dungeon Chamber Contents table, a " dominant 
inhabitant" is a creature that controls an area. Pets 
and allied creaing stairs to contain :he water 
Lava flows through the area (50 percent chance of 
a stone bridge crossing it) 

Overgrown mushrooms block progress and must 
be hacked down 25 percent chance of a mold or 
fungus dungeon hazard hidden among them) 
Poisonous gas (deals ld6 poison damage per 
minute of exposure) 

Reverse gravity effect causes creatures to fall toward 
the ceiling 

Wall of fire blocks passage 
Walt of force blocks passage 


Ra n pom Traps _ 

If you need a trap quickly or want to drop random 
traps into a dungeon, use the sample traps presented 
in chapter 5, 'Adventure Environments'' or the tables 
below. If you use the tables, start with the Trap Effects 
and Trap Trigger tables to decide the type of trap, 
then use the Trap Damage Severity tables to decide 
bow deadly it should be. For more information on trap 
damage severity, see chapter 5, 


Trap Trigger 

d6 Trigger 

1 Stepped on (floor, stairs) 

2 Moved through (doorway, hallway) 

3 Touched (doorknob, statue) 

4 Opened (door, treasure chest) 

5 Looked at (mural, arcane symbol) 

6 Moved (cart, stone block) 

Trap Damage Severity 

d6 Damage Severity 

1-2 Setback 



Trap Effects 

d 100 Effect 

01-04 Magic missiles shoot from a statue or object 
05-07 Collapsing staircase creates a ramp that deposits 
characters into a pit at its lower end 
08-10 Ceiling block falls, or entire ceiling collapses aracter 

92-94 Stone block smashes across hallway 

95-97 Symbol 

98-00 Walls slide together 

Random Tricks 


3-5 Dangerous 

6 Deadly 



Tricks are quirkier and less deadly than traps. Some 
are effects left behind by the dungeon’s creators, while 
others might be manifestations of the strange magical 
energy suffusing the dungeon. 

The following tables allow you to generate random 
tricks. Roll first to determine an object that the trick 
is placed on. then roil to determine the nature of the 
trick. Some tricks are permanent effects that can t be 
dispelled; others are temporary or can be neutralized 
with a dispel magic spell. You decide which is which. 


APPENDIX A I R A N D G M D U N G EO N S 

297 





















Trick Objects 


d20 

Object 

d20 

Object 

1 

Book 

12 

Pool of water 

2 

Brain preserved 

13 

Runes engraved 


in a jar 


on wall or floor 

3 

Burning fire 

14 

Skull 

4 

Cracked gem 

15 

Sphere of magical 

5 

Door 


energy 

6 

Fresco 

16 

Statue 

7 

Furniture 

17 

Stone obelisk 

8 

Glass sculpture 

18 

Suit of armor 

9 

Mushroom field 

19 

Tapestry or rug 

10 

Painting 

20 

Target dummy 

11 

Plant or tree 




Tricks 

dlOO Trick Effect 

01-03 Ages the first person to touch the object 
04-06 The touched object animates, or it animates other 
objects nearby 

07-10 Asks three skill-testing questions ther place 
98-00 Swaps two or more characters' minds 


Random treasures 

Use the tables and guidelines in chapter 7, “Treasure" to 
determine the treasure in each area of your dungeon. 

Empty Rooms 

An empty room can be a godsend for characters who 
need a safe place to take a short rest. Characters can 
also barricade themselves there and take a long rest. 

Sometimes such a room isn’t as empty as it appears. If 
the characters search a room carefully, you can reward 
them with a secret compartment containing a journal 
belonging to a previous inhabitant, a map leading to 
another dungeon, or some other discovery. 

Dungeon Dressing 

The tables in this section provide miscellaneous 
items and points of interest that can be placed in your 
dungeon. Dungeon dressing can help establish the 
atmosphere of a dungeon, give clues about its creators 
and history, provide the basis for tricks and traps, or 
encourage exploration. 

To generate dungeon dressing at random, roll once on 
each of the following tables: Noises, Air, and Odors. Roll 
as often as you like on the other tables in this section, or 
choose appropriate furnishings for the area. 


Noises 




d!00 

Effect 

dlOO 

Effect 

01-05 

Bang or slam 

49 

Jingling 

06 

Bellowing 

50-53 

Knocking 

07 

Buzzing 

54-55 

Laughter 

08-10 

Chanting 

56-57 

Moaning 

11 

Chiming 

58-60 

Murmuring 

12 1-75 

Rotting vegetation 

06-39 

Dank or moldy 

76-77 

Salty and wet 

40-49 

Earthy 

78-82 

Smoky 

50-57 

Manure 

83-89 

Stale 

58-61 

Metallic 

90-95 

Sulfurous 

62-65 

Ozone 

96-00 

Urine 


General Features 


dlOO 

Item 

dlOO 

Item 

01 

Arrow, broken 

62-64 

Leaves and twigs 

(32-04 

Ashes 

65-68 

Mold (common) 

05-06 

Bones 

69 

Pick handle 

07 

Bottle, broken 

70 

Pole, broken 

08 

Chain, corroded 


(5 ft. long) 

09 

Club, splintered 

71 

Pottery shards 

10-19 

Cobwebs 

72-73 

Rags 

20 

Coin, copper 

74 

Rope, rotten 

21-22 

Cracks, ceiling 

75-76 

Rubble and dirt 

23-24 

Cracks, floor 

77 

Sack, torn 

25-26 

Cracks, wall 

78-80 

Slime (harmless) 

27 

Dagger hilt 

81 

Spike, rusted 

28-29 

Damp ceiling 

82-83 

Sticks 

30-33 

Dampness, wall 

84 

Stones, small 

34 

Dried blood 

85 

Straw 

35-41 

Dripping blood 

86 

Sword bfade, 

42-44 

Dung 


broken 

45-49 

Dust 

S7 

Teeth or fangs, 

50 

Flask, cracked 


scattered 

51 

Food scraps 

SS 

Torch stub 

52 

Fungi (common, 

89 

Wall scratchings 

53-55 

Guano 

90-91 

-Later, large 

56 

Hair or fur 


puddle 

57 

Hammer head, 

92-93 

Water, small 


cracked 


puddle 

58 

Helmet, badly 

94-95 

Water, trickle 


dented 

96 

Wax blob 

59 

Iron bar. bent 


(candle stub) 


and rusted 

97 

Wax drippings 

60 

Jable, small 

39 

Desk 

91 

Table, trestle 

40-42 

Fireplace and 

92 

Tapestry 


wood 

93 

Throne 

43 

Fireplace with 

94 

Trunk 


mantle 

95 

Tub 

44 

Firkin (small 

96 

Tun (huge cask, 


cask, 10 gallons) 


250 gallons) 

45 

Fountain 

97 

Urn 

46 

Fresco 

98 

Wall basin 

47 

Grindstone 


and font 

4S 

Hamper 

99 

Wood billets 

49 

Hassock 

00 

Workbench 


APPENDIX A I RANDOM DUNGEONS 










Relic fous Articles and Furnishings 

dlOO 

item 

dlOO 

Item 

dioo 

Item 

dioo 

Item 

46-47 

Hourglass 

85-86 

Tube (piping) 

01-05 

Altar 

54 

Lectern 

48-49 

fug 

87 

Tweezers 

06-08 

Bells 

55 

Mosaic 

50 

Kettle 

88-90 

Vial 

09-11 

Brazier 

56-58 

Offertory 

51 

Ladle 

91 

Water clock 

12 

Candelabra 


container 

52 

Lamp or lantern 

92 

Wire 

13-14 

Candles 

59 

Paintings or 

53 

Lens (concave 

93-00 

Workbench 

15 

Candlesticks 


frescoes 


or convex) 



16 

Cassocks 

60-61 

Pews 





17 

Chimes 

62 

Pipes, musical 

Utensils and Personal 

Items 


is-19 

Cloth, altar 

63 

Prayer rug 

dioo 

Item 

dlOO 

Item 

20-23 

Columns or 

64 

Pulpit 

01 

Awl 

47-48 

Mirror 


pillars 

65 

Rail 

02 

Bandages 

49 

Needle(s) 

24 

Curtain or 

66-69 

Robes 

03 

Basin 

50 

OH, cooking 


tapestry 

70-71 

Screen 

04-05 

Basket 

51 

Oil, fuel 

25 

Drum 

72

Box 

63 

Prism 


tankard 


figurine 

19-22 

Brazier 

64-65 

Quill 

31-32 

Flask or jar 

78-79 

Thread 

23 

Cage 

66-68 

Retort 

33 

Food 

80-82 

Tinderbox [with 

24 

Candle 

69 

Rod, mixing or 

34 

Fork 


flint and steel) 

25-26 

Candlestick 


stirring 

35 

Grater 

S3 

Towel 

27-28 

Cauldron 

70-72 

Scroll 

36 

Grinder 

84 

Tray 

29-30 

Chalk 

73 

Sexton 

37 

Horn, drinking 

85 

Trivet or tripod 

31-32 

Crucible 

74-75 

Skull 

3S 

Hourglass 

86 

Tureen 

33 

Crystal ball 

76 

Spatula 

39 

Jug or pitcher 

87-88 

Twine 

34 

Decanter 

77 

Spoon, measuring 

40 

Kettle 

90 

Vase 

35 

Desk 

78 

Stand 

41 

Key 

91-92 

Vial 

36 

Dish 

79 

Stool 

42 

Knife 

93 

Washcloth 

37-40 

Flask or jar 

80 

Stuffed animal 

43 

Knucklebones 

94 

Whetstone 

41 

Funnel 

81 

Tank (container) 


or dice 

95-96 

Wig 

42 

Furnace 

82 

Tongs 

44 

Ladle 

97-98 

Wool 

43-44 

Herbs 

83 

Tripod 

45-46 

Lamp or lantern 

99-00 

Yarn 

45 

Horn 

84 

Tube (container) 






appen dix a 


300 


random dungeons 






Container Contents 


dlOO 

Item 

dlOO 

Item 

01-03 

Ash 

60-61 

Lumps, 

04-06 

Bark 


unidentifiable 

07-09 

Bodily organs 

62-64 

Oil 

10-14 

Bones 

65-68 

Paste 

15-17 

Cinders 

69-71 

Pellets 

18-22 

Crystals 

72-84 

Powder 

23-26 

Dust 

85-86 


Theological text 

54 

Lunatic’s ravings 

96 

Tome of 

55 

Magic tricks (not 


forbidden lore 


a spetlbook) 

97-99 

Travelogue for an 

56 

Magic scroll 


exotic land 

57-59 

Map or atlas 

00 

Travelogue of the 

60 

Memoir 


planes 

61-62 

Navigational 
chart or star chart 






APPENDIX A I RANDOM DUNGEONS 

















Appendix B: Monster Lists 


Monsters by Environment 

Desert Monsters 


The following tables organize monsters by environment 

Monsters 

Challenge Rating (XP) 

and challenge rating. These tables omit monsters that 

Cat, commoner, hyena, jackal, 

0 (10 XP) 

don't customarily inhabit the environments included 

scorpion, vulture 


here, such as angels and demons. 


Bandit, camel, flying snake, guard, 

3/8 (25 XP) 

Arctic Monsters 


kobold, mule, poisonous snake, 
stirge, tribal warrior 


Monsters 

Challenge Rating (XP) 

Constrictor snake, giant lizard, giant 

1/4 (30 XP) 

Commoner, owl 

0 {10 XP} 

poisonous snake, giant wolf spider, 


Bandit, blood hawk, kobold, tribal 

1/S (25 XP) 

pseudodragon, winged kobold 


warrior 


Dust mephit, gnoll, hobgoblin, 

1/2 (300 XP) 

Giant owl, winged kobold 

1/4 (50 XP) 

jackalwere, scout, swarm of insects 


Ice mephit, ore, scout 

1/2 (100 XP) 

Death dog, giant hyena, giant spider, 

1 (200 XP) 

Brown bear, half-ogre 

1 (200 XP) 

giant toad, giant vulture, halffogre, 


Bandit captain, berserker, druid, 

2 (450 XP) 

lion, thrbkreen, yuan-ti pureblood 


griffon, ogre, ore Eye of Gruumsh, 


Bandit captain, berserker, druid, 

2 (450 XP) 

orog, polar bear, saber-toothed tiger 


giant constrictor snake, gnoll pack 


Manticore, veteran, winter wolf, yeti 

3 (700 XP) 

lord, ogre 


Revenant, troll, werebear, young 

5 {1,800 XP) 

Giant scorpion, hobgoblin captain, 

3 (700 XP) 

remorhaz 


mummy, phase spider, wight, yuan-ti 


Mammoth, young white dragon 

6 (2,300 XP) 

malison 


Frost giant 

S (3,900 XP) 

Couatl, gnoll fang of Yeenoghu, 

4 (1,100 XP) 

Abominable yeti 

9 (5,000 XP) 

lamia, weretiger 


Remorhaz, roc 

11 (7,200 XP) 

Air elemental, fire elemental, revenant 

5 (1,800 XP) 

Adult white dragon 

13 (10,000 XP) 

Cyclops, medusa, young brass dragon 

6 (2,300 XP) 

Ancient white dragon 

20 (24,500 XP) 

Yuan-ti abomination 

7 (2,900 XP) 



Young blue dragon 

9 (5,000 XP) 

Coastal Monsters 


Guardian naga 

10 (5,900 XP) 

Monsters 

Challenge Rating (XP) 

0 (10 XP) 

1/8 (25 XP) 

Efreeti, gynosphinx, roc 

11 (7,200 XP) 

Commoner, crab, eagle 

Bandit, blood hawk, giant crab, 
guard, kobold, merfolk, poisonous 
snake, stirge, tribal warrior 

Giant lizard, giant wolf spider, 
pseudodragon, pteranodon, winged 

Adult brass dragon 

Mummy lord, purple worm 

Adult blue dragon 

13 (10,000 XP) 

15 (13,bronze dragon 

22 (30,000 XP) 

hobgoblin, lizardfolk, ore. satyr, scout, 


Ancient blue dragon 

23 (32,500 XP) 

swarm of insects, vine blight, worg 



APPENDIX B I MOHSTER LISTS 





























Monsters 

Brown bear, bugbear, dire wolf, 
dryad, faerie dragon (yellow or 
younger), giant hyena, giant spider, 
giant toad, go biin boss, half-ogre, 
harpy, tiger, yuan-ti pureblood 
Ankheg, awakened tree, bandit 
captain, berserker, centaur, druid, 
ettercap, faerie dragon (green or 
older), giant boar, giant constrictor 
snake, giant elk, gnoll pack lord, 
grick, lizardfolk shaman, ogre, ore 
Eye ofGruumsh, orog, pegasus, 
swarm of poisonous snakes, we rerat, 
will-o'-wisp 

Displacer beast, green hag, 
hobgoblin captain, owlbear, phase 
spider, veteran, werewolf, yuan-ti 
malison 

Banshee, couatl, gnoll fang of 
Yeenogbu, wereboar, weretiger 
Gorgon, revenant, shambling 
mound, troll, unicorn, werebear 
Giant ape, grick alpha, oni, 
yuan-ti abomination 
Young green dragon 
Treant 

Guardian naga, young gold dragon 
Adult green dragon 
Adult gold dragon 
Ancient green dragon 
Ancient gold dragon 


Challenge Rating (XP) 
1 (200 XP) 


2 (450 XP) 


3 (700 XP) 


4 (1,100 XP) 

5 (1,800 XP) 

7 (2.900 XP) 

8 (3,900 XP) 

9 (5,000 XP) 
10 (5,900 XP) 

15 (13,000 XP) 
17 (18,000 XP) 
22 


24 (36,500 XP) 


Grassland Monsters 
M onsters 

Cat, commoner, deer, eaglider, goblin, panther {cougar), 
pseudodragon, swarm of bats, swarm 
of ravens, winged kobold, wolf 
Giant goat, gnoll, hobgoblin, ore, 
scout, swarm of insects, worg 
Brown bear, dire wolf, giant eagle, 
giant hyena, goblin boss, half-ogre, 
harpy, hippogriff, Non 
Bandit captain, berserker, druid, 
giant boar, giant elk, gnoll pack lord, 
griffon, ogre, ore Eye of Gruumsh, 


Challenge Rating (XP) 

0 (10 XP) 

1/8 (25 XP) 

1/4 (50 XP) 

1/2 (100 XP) 

1 (200 XP) 

2 (450 XP) 


orog, pegasus, peryton 

Green hag, hobgoblin captain, 3 {700 XP) 

manticore, phase spider, veteran, 

werewolf 

Ettin, gnoll fang of Yeenoghu, 4 (1,100 XP) 

wereboar 


Bulette, gorgon, hill giant, revenant, 
troll, werebear 

Chimera, cyclops, galeb duhr, wyvern 
Stone giant, young copper dragon 
Young red dragon 
Roc 

Adult copper dragon 
Adult red dragon 
Ancient copper dragon 
Ancient red dragon 


5 (1,800 XP) 

6 {2,300 XP) 

7 (2,900 XP) 

10 (5,900 XP) 

11 (7,200 XP) 
14 (11,500 XP) 
17 (18,000 XP) 
21 (27,500 XP) 
24 (36,500 XP) 



Bulette 


Monsters 

Eagle, goat 

Blood hawk, guard, kobold, stirge, 
tribal warrior 

Aarakocra, pseudodragon, 
pteranodon, swarm of bats, winged 
kobold 

Giant goat, ore, scout 
Giant eagle, half-ogre, harpy, 
hippogriff, lion 

Berserker, druid, giant elk, griffon, 
ogre, ore Eye of Gruumsh, orog, 
peryton, saber-toothed tiger 
Basilisk, hell hound, m00 XP) 

7 (2,900 XP) 

S (3,900 XP) 
14 (11,500 XP) 
21 (27,500 XP) 


304 


APPENDIX B I MONSTER LISTS 












Underdark Monsters 

Monsters 

Giant fire beetle, shrieker, - d 
sprout 

Flumph, giant rat, koboid, $" r ge, 
tribal warrior 

Drow, giant bat, giant centipede, 
giant lizard, giant poisonous snake 
goblin, grim lock, kuo-toa. swarm 
of bats, troglodyte, violet fungus, 
winged koboid 

Darkmantle, deep gnome, gas 
spore, gray ooze, hobgoblin, magma 
mephit, myconid adult, ore, piercer, 
rust monster, scout, shadow, swarm 
of insects 

Bugbear, duergar, fire snake, ghoul, 
giant spider, giant toad, goblin boss, 
half-ogre, kuo-toa whip, quaggoth 
spore servant, specter 
Carrion crawler, druid, gargoyle, 
gelatinous cube, ghast, giant 
constrictor snake, gibbering mouther, 
grick, intellect devourer, mimic, 
minotaur skeleton, nothic. ochre jelly, 
ogre, ore Eye of Gruumsh, orog, 
polar bear (cave bear), quaggoth 
Doppdganger, grelt, hobgoblin 
captain, hell hound, hook horror, 
kuo-toa monitor, minotaur, quaggoth 
thonob phase spider, spectator, 
veteran, water weird, wight 
Black pudding, bone naga, chuul, 
ettin, flameskuli, ghost 
Beholder zombie, drow elite warrior, 
earth elemental, otyugh, roper, 
salamander, troll, umber hulk, 
vampire spawn, wraith, xorn 
Chimera, cyclops, drider 
Drow mage, grick alpha, mind flayer, 
stone giant 

Cloaker, fomorian, might, phase spider, 
veteran, water weird, wight 
Couatl, ghost, succubus or incubus 
Cambion, gladiator, revenant, 
vampire spawn 
Invisible stalker, mage 
Oni, shield guardian 
Assassin 

Gray slaad, young silver dragon 

Archmage 

Rakshasa, vampire 

Spellcaster or warrior vampire 

Adult silver dragon 

Ancient silver dragon 

Tarrasque 


Challenge Rating (XP) 
0 (10 XP) 
1/S (25 XP) 
1/4 (50 XP) 
1/2 (100 XP) 

1 (200 XP) 

2 (450 XP) 


3 (700 XP) 
5 (1,800 XP) 

11 (7,200 XP) 
13 (10,000 XP) 
17 (lS.OOOXP) 
23 (50,000 XP) 


Challenge Rating (XP) 

0 (10 XP) 
1/S (25 XP) 


1/4 (50 XP) 


1/2 (100XP) 


1 (200 XP) 


2 (450 XP) 


3 (700 XP) 

4 (1,100 XP) 

5 (1,800 XP) 

6 (2,300 XP) 

7 (2,900 XP) 
S (3,900 XP) 
9 (5,000 XP) 

12 (8,400 XP) 
13 (10,000 XP) 

15 (13,000 XP) 

16 (15,000 XP) 
23 (32,500 XP) 

30 (155,000 XP) 


Phase Spider 


APPENDIX K I MONSTER LISTS 


305 













Monsters by Challenge Rating 

This index organizes the monsters in the Monster 
Manual by challenge rating. 


Challenge 0 (o-io xp) Quipper 

Awakened shrub Rat 

Baboon Raven 

Badger Scorpion 

Bat Sea horse 

Cat Shrieker 

Commoner Spider 

Crab Vulture 

Crawling claw Weasel 



Deer 

Eagle 

Frog 

Giant fire beetle 

Goat 

Hawk 

Homunculus 

Hyena 

jackal 

Lernure 

Lizard 

Myconid sprout 

Octopus 

Owl 


Challenge 1/8 (25 xpj 

Blood hawk 
Camel 
Cultist 
Flumph 
) 

Fire snake 
Ghoul 
Giant eagle 
Giant hyena 
Giant octopus 
Giant spider 
Giant toad 
Giant vulture 
Goblin boss 


::o6 


APPENDIX El I MONSTER LISTS 

























Green Dragon 
Wyrmling 


Gibbering mouther 
Githzerai monk 
GnoJI pack lord 
Green dragon wyrmling 
Grick 
Griffon 
Hunter shark 
Intellect devourer 
Lizardfolk shaman 
Merrow 
Mimic 

Minotaur skeleton 
My con id sovereign 
Gothic 
Ochre jelly 
Ogre 

Ogre zombie 
Ore Eye of Gruumsh 
Orog 
Pegasus 
Pentadrone 
Peryton 
Plesiosaurus 
Polar bear 

Poltergeist (specter) 

Priest 
Quaggoth 
Rhinoceros 
Rug of smothering 
Saber-toothed tiger 
Saruagrn priestess 
Sea hag 

Si ver dragon wyrmling 
Spined devil 

5 arm c‘ poisonous snakes 
a ere rat 

*Vh te dragon wyrmling 
Wif l-o -wisp 


Challenge 3 (700 XP) 

Ankylosaurus 
Basilisk 
Bearded devil 
Blue dragon wyrmling 
Bugbear chief 
Displacer beast 
Doppelganger 
Giant scorpion 
GEthyanki warrior 
Gold dragon wyrmling 
Green hag 
Grell 

Hell hound 
Hobgoblin captain 
Hook horror 
Killer whale 
Knight 

Kuo-toa monitor 
M anticore 
Minotaur 
Mummy 


Couatl 








Half-ogre 

Harpy 

Hippogriff 

Imp 

Kuo-toa whip 
Lion 

Quadrone 

Quaggoth spore servant 

Quasit 

Scarecrow 

Specter 

Spy 

Swarm of quippers 

Thri-kreen 

Tiger 

Yu an Hi pureblood 

Challenge 2 (4S0 XP) 

Allosaurus 
Ankheg 
Awakened tree 
Azer 

Bandit captain 
Berserker 

Black dragon wyrmling 

Bronze dragon wyrmling 

Carrion crawler 

Centaur 

Cult fanatic 

Druid 

Ette reap 

Faerie dragon (old; 
Gargoyle 
Gelatinous cube 
Ghast 
Giant boar 

Giant constrictor snake 
Giant elk 


Nightmare 

Gwlbear 

Phase spider 

Quaggoth thonot 

Spectator 

Veteran 

Water weird 

Werewolf 

Wight 

Winter wolf 

Yeti 

Yuan-ti malison 


Challenge 4 (voo XP) 

Banshee 
Black pudding 
Bone naga 
Chuul 
Couatl 
Elephant 
Ettin 

Flameskull 
Ghost 


i - - 
i #■ 


frT 

i - 




APPENDIX B | MON STEP LISTS 




















Gnoll fang of Yeenoghu 
Helmed horror 
Incubus 
Lamia 

Lizard king/queen 
Ore war chief 
Red dragon wyrmling 
Sea hag (in coven) 

Shadow demon 
Suecubus 
We reboar 
Weretiger 

Challenge 5 (i P soo XP) 

Air elemental 
Barbed devil 
Barlgura 

Beholder zombie 

Bulette 

Cambion 

Drow elite warrior 
Earth elemental 
Fire elemental 
Flesh golem 
Giant crocodile 


Giant shark 

Gladiator 

Gorgon 

Green hag (in coven) 

Hatred dragon veteran 

Hill giant 

Mezzoloth 

Night hag 

Otyugh 

Red slaadl 

Revenant 

Roper 

Sahuagin baron 
Salamander 
Shambling mound 
Triceratops 
Troll 

Umber hulk 

Unicorn 

Vampire spawn 

Water elemental 

Werebear 

Wraith 

Xorn 

Young remorhaz 



Bonc Devil 





SmAMBL ;Ps*G 
Mound 


Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 

Chasme 

Chimera 

Cyclops 

□rider 

Caleb duhr 

Grthzerai zerth 

Hobgoblin warlord 

Invisible stalker 

Kuo-toa archpriest 

Mage 

Mammoth 

Medusa 

Vrock 

Wyvern 

Young brass dragon 
Young white dragon 

Challenge 7 [2,900xp) 

Blue slaad 
Grow mage 
Giant ape 
Crick alpha 
Mind flayer 
Night hag (in coven) 

Oni 

Shield guardian 
Stone giant 
Young black dragon 
Young copper dragon 
Yuan-ti abomination 

Challenge 8 (3,900 xp) 

Assassin 
Chain devil 
Cloaker 


Drow priestess of Lolth 

Fomorian 

Frost giant 

Githyanki knight 

Green slaad 

Hezrou 

Hydra 

Mind flayer arcanist 
Spirit naga 
Tyrannosaurus rex 
Young bronze dragon 
Young green dragon 

Challenge 9 (5.000 XP) 

Abominable yeti 
Bone devil 
Clay golem 
Cloud giant 
Fire giant 
Glabrezu 
Gray slaad 
Nycaloth 
Treant 

Young blue dragon 
Young silver dragon 

Challenge 10 (s p 900 xp) 

Aboleth 
Death slaad 
Deva 

Guardian naga 
Stone golem 
Yochlol 

Young gold dragon 
Young red dragon 


308 




AI>P E N D IXB MO N STL k US ! S 














Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 

Behir 

Dao 

Djinni 

Efreeti 

Gynosphinx 

Horned devii 

Marid 

Remorhaz 

Roc 

Challenge 12{S,400 XP) 

Arcanaloth 

Archmage 

Erinyes 

Challenge 13 (i0,000 XP) 

Adult brass dragon 

Adult white dragon 

Beholder (not in lair) 

Nalfeshnee 

Rakshasa 

Storm giant 

Ultroloth 


Vampire 

Young red shadow dragon 

Challenge 14 (11,500 XP) 

Adult black dragon 
Adult copper dragon 
Beholder (in 
included here as well Use them as you will! 



Ground Floor 


Top Floor 


One square — 5 feet 



. 

, -M 



' 


J 



znd Floor 




1st Floor 


Basement 



One square - 5 feet 



APPENDIX C 


MAPS 









































































































































































































One square - 10 feet 




S Secret Door 
{l Concealed Door 


Door 


Stairs 


Pit Trap 


Secret Tunnel 





TPJ 

1 ; ^ 

_ ■ 


1 J 

| 


B 4 i^f ^bPi^ 











»> v ■ 

V \jLm ■- 

■> >i--- A\ 

_ j J - 

f||r \ 

Ux 

i "I 

1 JV 





B : ■ : 

■ 


ml 








Ifsa 





. -->1 


J-^-l 






[Tj 


4 



14 M 


F ^ 5*1 



.■{l 

1 “ 

\ 



■ 

fc 

*.* 


t 








* 




IF* 

£»■ 


i 























































































































































































































































































































































































































































APPENDIX G I MAPS 


' 












































































I 

■ 

I 

Ewalt, David M. Of Dice and Men. 

Gygax, Gary. Gary Gygax's Living Fantasy and the rest 
of the Gygaxian Fantasy Worlds series. 

-. Master o f the Game. 

— -—. Role-Flaying Mastery. 

Hind march. Will. The Bones: Us and Our Dice. 
Hindmarch, Will & Jeff Tidbali. Things We Think 
About Games. 

Hirsh, Jr,, E.D, 7V?e New Dictionary of Cultural Literacy 
Ingpen, Robert. The Encyclopedia of Things That 
Never Were. 

Kaufmann, J.E. & HAV. Kaufmann. The 
Medieval Fortress* 

King, Stephen. On Writing: A Memoir of the Cra ft. 
Koster, Raph. A Theory of Fun for Game Design , 

Laws, Robin D. Hamlet 's Hit Fowls* 

Lee, Alan & David Day. Castles. 

Macaulay, David. Castle. 

Malory, Sir Thomas. Le Morte dArthur. 

McKee, Robert. Story: Substance, Structure. Style , and 
the Principles of Screen writing. 

Mortimer, Ian. The Time Traveler's Guide to 
Medieval England. 

O’Connor, Paul Ryan, ed. Grimtooths Traps. 
PennyPress. Variety Puzzles and Games series. 
Peterson, Jon. Playing at the World. 

Robbins, Ben. Microscope. 

Schell, Jesse. Game Design: A Book of Lenses . 

Snyder, Blake. Save the Cat. 

Swift, Michael and Angus Konst am. Cities of the 
Renaissance World. 

Truby, job n. The Anatomy of Story. 

TSR. Anns and Equipment Guide* 

-. Campaign Sourcebook/Catacomb Guide ♦ 

-. The Castle Guide. 

Walmslev, Graham. Play Unsafe: How improvisation 
Can Change the Way ackground 
barred doors, 103 
Beastlands, 58, 60 
becoming lost, 111-112, 
117-118 

beginning an adventure, 72, 
74, 77, 79 

between adventures, 125-131 
blessings, 227-228 
bond (NPC), 91 
Border Ethereal, 48 


bringing back the dead, 24 
brown mold, 105 
businesses (character), 127, 
129 

buying magic items, 135-136 
Bytopia, 58, 59-60 
campaign, 9 ? 25-41,126. See 
aha creating a campaign 
tracking, 126 
Cania (Nine Hells), 65 
Carceri, 58, 63 

challenge rating, 82, 92, 274, 
274-275, 279, 306-309 
charges in magic items, 141 
charms, 228 
chases, 252-255 
city, 17 

City of Brass, 55-56 
class, 96-97, 283,287-289 
NPC, 96-97 
cleaving, 272 
climax, 72, 75, 77 
climb onto a bigger creature, 
271 

clues (mystery), 78 
coastal monsters, 302 
cold, no 

collapsing roof (trap), 122 
color pools (Astral), 47 
combat, 247-252, 270-273 
combat encounter, 81-85. See 
also creating an encounter: 
combat 

command word, 141 
commerce, 19-20 
complex traps, 121-122 
complications, 79—SI 
concealed doors, 104 
conditions. 248 
conflict with a sentient item. 
216 


creating a campaign (cont.) 
story, 125 
theme, 36 
time, 32 

creating a currency, 20 
Creating a downtime activity, 
131 

creating a dungeon, 72-73, 
74, 99-105, 290-301. See 
also creating an encounter; 
random encounters 
air quality, 105 
creator, 99-101 
ecology, 102 
encounters, 102 
factions, 101-102 
featuren, 244-245 
cosmology, 43-44 
cover, 251, 272 
crafting a magic item. 

128-129 

creating a background, 26, 

289 

creating a campaign, 14, 

25-41.43-44, 125, See 
also creating a world 
character backgrounds, 26 
characters, 26, 36 
continuing or episodic, 36 
ending, 33 
events, 26-33 
flavor, 38-41 
map, 14, 25-26 
planes of existence, 43-44 
play style, 34-36 


also creating a dungeon; 
Creating an encounter; 
random encounters 
adventure seeds, 125 426 
character goals, 72-74, 76 
climax, 72, 75, 77 
complications, 79-81 
dungeon, 99-105 
elements, 71-72 
event-based, 75-77 
foreshadowing, 126 
intrigue, 78 

introduction, 72, 74, 77, 79 

location-based, 72-75 

maps, 72, 75, 77 

moral quandaries, 79-80 

mystery, 77-78 

NPCs, 74, 75-76, 77, 78 

side quests, 81 

structure, 72 

twists, 80 

type, 72-79 

villain, 74, 75-76, 77, 78 


12-13 

loose pantheon, 10-11 
monotheism, 12 
mystery cults, 11 -12 
racial, 13 

tight pantheon, 11 
creating a settlement, 15-20, 
112-116 

as an adventure site, 16 
atmosphere, 17 
commerce, 19-20 
encounters, 114-116 
government, 17-19 
map, 114, 313 
purpose, 15-16 
random, 112-114 
size, 16-17 

creating a spell, 283-284 
creating a trap, 120-122 
complex, 121-122 
detection, 120-121 
disabling, 120-121 
effects, 121 
trigger, 120 




INDEX 






creating a wilderness, 14, 
25-26, 73, 106-112, 
116-120. See oho creating 
an ner 
Planes 

Elysium, 58. 60 
encounter, 75, 77, 81-87, 

102, 106. See also creating 
an encounter; random 
encounters 

ending a campaign, 33 
ending an adventure, 72, 

75, 77 

Endless Maze (Abyss), 63 
environment. 109-112, 
116-120 

epic boons, 230, 231-232 
epic fantasy, 39 
episodic campaign, 36 
equEpment (NPC), 92 
ether cyclone, 49 
Ethereal curtains, 48-49 
Ethereal Plane, 43, 4S-49 
event-based adventure, 75-77 
events [campaign), 26-33 
Evernight (Shadowfell), 52 
expenses (character), 126- 127 
experience points (XP), 

82-84, 260-261 
thresholds, 82-83 
exploration, 242-244 
explosives, 267-268 
extra NPC, 94 
facing, 252 

factions. See organizations; 
see oho creating a dungeon: 
factions 

falling net (trap), 122 
Far Realm, 68 
favors, 229-230 
fear, 266 
fey crossings, 50 
Feywild magic, 50 
Feywild, 43. 49-50 
firearms, 267, 268 
fire-breathing statue (trap), 
122 

flanking, 251 

flavor (campaign), 38-41 
flaw (NPC), 91 
flying, 119-120 
followers, 92-93 
food and water, 111 
foraging, 111 
foreshadowing, 126 
forest monsters, 302-303 
framing events, 79 
frigid water, 110 
fun, 85 

gaining levels, 131,261 
gaining renown, 22, 129 
Gaping Maw (Abyss), 62 
garrisons (character), 127 
gate'towns (Outlands), 67 
Gehenna, 58, 63 
gemstones, 133. 134 
Gloaming Court (Feywild), 49 
god. See deity 
government, 17-19 
grassland monsters, 303 


greater deity,hools of, 24 
magic items, 128-129, 
129-130,133, 135-227 
alphabetical descriptions, 
150-214 

artifacts, 219-227 
attune merit, 136-138 
buying, 135-136 
categories, 139-140. See 
oho specific category 
entries 

crafting, 128-129, 141 
cursed, 138-139 
formulas, 141 
identifying, 136 
rarity, 135 

resilience, 141, See also 
objects 

selling, 129-130, 135-136 
sentient, 214-218 
special features, 141-143 
wearing and wielding, 
140-141 

Maladomlni (Nine Hells), 65 
Malbolge (Nine Hells), 65 
mannerism (NPC), 90 
mapping, 14, 25-26, 72, 75, 

77, 102-105, 108-109, 114, 
255 

campaign, 14, 25 
scale, 14 
chases, 255 
dungeon,102-105 
samples, 310-315 
settlement, 114 
wilderness, 108-109 
mark, 271 

marks of prestige. 228-231 
massive damage, 273 
Material Plane, 43 
Material Plane echoes, 43. See 
oho Feywild; Shadowfell 
Mechanus, 58, 66 
medals, 229 

memory loss (Feywild), 50 
metagame thinking, 235 
milestones, 261 
Minauros (Nine Hells), 64 
miniatures, 250-252 
missing players, 235-236, 260 
mixing potions, 140 
mobs, 250 

modifying a class, 287-289 
modifying a magic item, 284 
modifying a monster, 273-274 
monotheism, 12 
monsters, 71, 74, 82, 

91-92, 247-248, 273-283, 
302-305, 306-309. See 
oho creating a monster; 
creating an encounter; 
creating an NPC; random 
encounters: specific terrain 
entries 


INDEX 









monsters (corrt.) 
asNPCs, 91-92 
by cha4 
piety, 23 

pit (trap), 122-123 
planar categories, 43 
planar layers* 58 
planar portals, 45. 47, 48-49, 
50, 51, 58-59. 67-68 
planar travel, 44-46, 58-59. 

See also planar portals 
Plane of Air, 53-54 
Plane of Earth, 54 
Plane of Faerie, See Feywild, 
Plane of Fire, 55-56 
Plane of Shadow. 

See Shadowfell 
Plane of Water, 5 6-57 
planes of existence, 43-69. 
See also cosmology; specific 
plane entries 
players, 6 
play style, 34-36 
plot points, 269-270 
poison, 257-258 
poison darts (trap), 123 
poison needle (trap), 123 
portcullises, 104 
Positive Plane, 43 
potions, 139, 140 
precipitation, 110 
proficiency, 239, 263-264 
background, 264 
dice, 263 

personality trait, 264 
property (character), 126-127 
province scale (map), 14 
psychic dissonance (Outer 
Planes), 59 

psychic wind (Astral), 47-48 
published adventures, 72 
published worlds, 9, 68 
quicksand, 110 
quirk, 90, 143 
magic item, 143 
NPC, 90 
race, 285-287 
racial deity, 13 
rain, 110 

raising a stronghold, 128 
random dungeons, 290-301 
random encounters, 85-87, 
106, 114-116, 118 
challenge, 87 
checking for, 86 
creating tables, 86-87 
sample table, 87 
sea,118 

settlement, 114-116 
triggering, 85 
underwater, 116 
wilderness, 106 
random magic items, 144-149 
random settlements, 

112-114. See also creating a 
settlement 

random treasure, 133-135, 
136-139, 144-149 
rank (in an organization), 2ed factor, 270-271 
spell points, 2SS-2S9 
spells in magic items, 141 
sphere of annihilation (trap), 
123 

spiderwebs, 105 
spiked pit (trap). 123 
staff’s, 140 

starting at higher level, 38 
starting attitude (NPC) r 244 
story, 71, 72, 125 
strongholds, 109, 12S, 230 


structure (adventure), 72 
stuck doors, 103 
Stygia (Nine Hells), 64-65 
Styx. See River Styx 
subrace, 285-2S7 
success at a cost, 242 
Summer Court (Feywild), 49 
supernatural gifts, 227-228 
survival, 109-112 
suspects (mystery), 77-78 
swamp monsters, 304 
swashbuckling, 40 
swimming, 116-117 
swords and sorcery, 38-39 
system shock, 273 
table rules, 235-236 
table talk, 235 
tactical map, 250-252 
talent (NPC), 90 
teleportation circles, 24 
temperature, 109-110 
Thanatos (Abyss), 62 
theme (campaign), 36 
thin ice,111 
tiers of play, 36-38 
tight pantheon, 11 
time, 32-33 

time warp (Feywild), 50 

titan, 11 

titles, I9 r 230 

tools, 239 

town, 17 

tracking, 244 


training, 131, 231 
to gain levels, 131 
Transitive Planes, 43 
traps, 120-123. See 
also creating a trap 
sample, 122-123 
travel, 1Q6-108, 109-112, 
116-120, 242-244 
pace, 242-243 
treasure, 133-232 
tables, 133, 136-139, 
144-149 

triggering a trap, 120 
Triple Realm (Abyss), 63 
tumble, 272 
twists (adventure), 80 
Underdark monsters, 305 
underwater, 116-117, 305 
monsters, 305 
unseelie fey, 49 
Upper Planes, 58. See 
also O